# 0171 General requirements

<!-- Worksection abstract

This worksection *Template* draws together content including
administrative requirements applicable to new work, interiors, and
alterations and additions, including landscaping and building services.
As the content is relevant to all subcontractors every other NATSPEC
worksection includes a cross reference to this worksection. It covers
interpretation, referenced documents, performance, design by the
contractor, contractor\'s submissions and inspections, products and
materials, ancillary building work, testing and commissioning,
completion, project records, and maintenance during the contract period.

How to use this worksection

This worksection *Template* must be customised for each project. See [A
guide to NATSPEC
worksections](https://www.natspec.com.au/a-guide-to-natspec-worksections)
([www.natspec.com.au](https://www.natspec.com.au/a-guide-to-natspec-worksections))
for information on *Template* structure, word styles, and completing a
worksection.

Related material located elsewhere in NATSPEC

If a listed worksection is not part of your package and you wish to
purchase it, contact NATSPEC.

Related material may be found in other worksections. See for example:

-   *0131 Preliminaries*.
-   *0133 Preliminaries (Interior and alterations)*.
-   *0140 Preliminaries - ABIC BW 2018 C*.
-   *0141 Preliminaries - ABIC MW-2018*.
-   *0142 Preliminaries - ABIC SW-2018*.
-   *0143 Preliminaries - AS 2124*.
-   *0144 Preliminaries - AS 4000*.
-   *0145 Preliminaries - AS 4905*.
-   *0146 Preliminaries - AS 4902*.
-   *0148 Preliminaries - ABIC EW-1*.
-   *0149 Preliminaries - NCW4*.

The Preliminaries worksections cover site management requirements of the
owner, including existing services, adjoining properties, signboards and
surveyors marks. See NATSPEC TECHnote GEN 016.

Cross references

Worksections that reference this worksection are:

-   All.

Material not included in NATSPEC

Some projects may include items not covered by this worksection. For
this you may need to create new text.

Documenting this and related work

You may document this and related work as follows:

-   The worksection includes general requirements for commissioning.
    Document specific requirements in the relevant worksection. Document
    commissioning responsibilities in *0164 Commissioning* if principal
    is engaging an independent commissioning manager.

A project specification developed from this worksection may describe
acceptable forms of warranty, notice required for inspections, and
acceptable testing authorities.

The worksection should be read in the context of:

-   The General conditions of contract.
-   Any Special conditions of contract.
-   The project Preliminaries.
-   Any separately specified quality assurance requirements.

The *Normal* style text of this worksection may refer to items as being
documented elsewhere in the contract documentation. Make sure they are
documented.

For example:

-   Inspection notice.
-   Concrete plinths.

Search [acumen.architecture.com.au](http://acumen.architecture.com.au/),
the Australian Institute of Architects\' practice advisory subscription
service, for notes on the following:

-   Glossary of Environmentally Sustainable Design.
-   Guarantees and warranties.
-   Indoor environment quality.
-   Project records.
-   Referencing standard documents.
-   Shop drawings.
-   Site planning and design for bushfire.
-   Sustainable design.
-   Work health and safety (WHS).

Specifying ESD

The following may be specified by retaining default text:

-   Access for maintenance, commissioning, operation and maintenance
    manuals, record drawings and training for improved operational
    efficiency and ongoing maintenance.
-   Exterior and interior corrosivity categories for appropriate
    durability to maximise material life cycle of metallic components.
-   Prohibition on hazardous materials.
-   Provisions for reducing services noise and vibration level.

The following may be specified by using included options:

-   Green Star certification requirements.

The following may be specified by including additional text:

-   Re-use of existing services systems.
-   Materials and products with recycled material content, low toxic
    emissions, low embodied energy and embodied water, and able to be
    easily recycled.
-   Materials sourced close to site.

Refer to NATSPEC TECHreport TR 01 on specifying ESD.
-->

## General

NATSPEC does not recommend the use of Scope of Works clauses. If you
wish to include a general description you may add it here, or in the
corresponding location of selected worksections. See
NATSPEC TECHnote GEN 021 on the benefits and risks of Scope of Works
clauses, and writing an effective clause if required.

### Precedence

#### General {#general-1 .unnumbered}

Order of precedence: If there is conflict or inconsistency between the
worksections of this specification, the requirements of worksections
take the following order of precedence:

-   All worksections other than those listed below.
-   *0701 Mechanical systems, 0801 Hydraulic systems, 0901 Electrical
    systems* and *1001 Fire services systems.*
-   *018 Common requirements* worksections.
-   *0171 General requirements*.

### Cross references

#### Common requirements {#common-requirements .unnumbered}

Requirement: Conform to the following worksections:

-   *0181 Adhesives, sealants and fasteners*.
-   *0182 Fire-stopping*.
-   *0183 Metals and prefinishes*.
-   *0184 Termite management*.
-   *0185 Timber products, finishes and treatment*.

In a smaller project, some worksections may not be used. Delete
worksection if not required. The 018 Common requirements subgroup are
umbrella requirements for all building and services worksections. By
including them here, it is not necessary to repeat them in other
worksections.

NATSPEC uses generic worksection titles, whether or not there are
branded equivalents. If you use a branded worksection, change the cross
reference here. Refer to NATSPEC TECHnote GEN 008 on generic and branded
worksections and their relative advantages.

#### Cross referencing styles {#cross-referencing-styles .unnumbered}

General: Within the text, titles are cross referenced using the
following styles:

-   Worksection titles are indicated by *Italicised* text.
-   Subsection titles are indicated by CAPITAL text.
-   Clause titles are indicated by **BOLD CAPITAL** text.
-   Subclause titles are indicated by **Bold Sentence case** text.

### Referenced documents

<!-- The construction methods in some standards may conflict with the
relevant statutory requirements. It is the specifiers responsibility to
make sure the detailed provisions of the specification, including
references to standards, do not conflict with statutory requirements in
the jurisdiction in which the project is being constructed.
-->
#### General

Precedence: The requirements of worksections override conflicting
requirements of their referenced documents. The requirements of the
referenced documents are minimum requirements.

Contractual relationships: Responsibilities and duties of the principal,
contractor and contract administrator are not altered by requirements in
the documents referenced in this specification.

Current editions: Use referenced documents which are the editions, with
amendments, current 3 months before the closing date for tenders.

Exception to current editions: If statutory requirements reference other
editions or standards, conform to those other editions or standards.

<!--
Documents and standards cited in NATSPEC are current editions of those
documents, one month before the time of publication of the latest
NATSPEC *Update* release. Editions cited in the NCC (for example) may
not accord with the current edition, hence the exception. See
NATSPEC TECHnote GEN 011 on NCC standard citations.

Site copies:  

List here any copies of standards or referenced documents required to be
held on site.
-->
European standards: Any national European Standard (e.g. BS EN, IS EN or
DIN EN) may be used in place of the equivalent referenced European
Standard (EN).
<!--
A published European Standard must be given the status of national
standard in all European member countries, who also have the obligation
to withdraw any national standards that conflict with it. Therefore
national editions of an EN standard are all identical.
-->
### Contract documents

#### Services diagrammatic layouts {#services-diagrammatic-layouts .unnumbered}

General: Layouts of service lines, plant and equipment shown on the
drawings are diagrammatic only, except where figured dimensions are
provided or calculable.

Before commencing work:

-   Obtain measurements and other necessary information.

-   Coordinate the design and installation in conjunction with all
    trades.

#### Levels {#levels .unnumbered}

General: Spot levels take precedence over contour lines and ground
profile lines.

#### Drawings and manuals for existing services {#drawings-and-manuals-for-existing-services .unnumbered}

Applicable if existing documentation is provided for information.

Subsurface services: Information shown on the drawings relating to
underground or submerged services is accurate to the following quality
level:

-   Quality level to AS 5488.1:  

AS 5488.1 defines four quality levels for the accuracy of information
held on subsurface utilities, from A to D. Indicate the quality level of
the information being provided. To determine the accuracy of the
information held refer to AS 5488.1. For example if the location
information is only indicative this would be classified as quality level
D.

Warranty: No warranty is given as to the completeness or accuracy of
drawings and/or manuals of existing services.

### Interpretation

#### Abbreviations {#abbreviations .unnumbered}

General: For the purposes of this specification the following
abbreviations apply:

-   AS: Australian Standard.
-   BCA: National Construction Code Series Volume One: Building Code of
    Australia Class 2 to 9 Buildings and Volume Two: Building Code of
    Australia Class 1 and Class 10 Buildings.
-   EN: European Norm (European Standard).
-   GRP: Glass Reinforced Plastic.
-   IP: Ingress protection.
-   NATA: National Association of Testing Authorities.
-   NCC: National Construction Code.
-   NZS: New Zealand Standard.
-   PCA: National Construction Code Series Volume 3: Plumbing Code of
    Australia.
-   PVC: Polyvinyl Chloride.
-   PVC-U: Unplasticised Polyvinyl Chloride. Also known as UPVC.
-   SDS: Safety data sheets.
-   VOC: Volatile Organic Compound.
-   WHS: Work Health and Safety.

Define here any you wish to include globally, otherwise define in the
worksections they appear. Add/delete as appropriate.

#### Definitions {#definitions .unnumbered}

General: For the purposes of this specification, the following
definitions apply:

-   Access for maintenance: Includes access for maintenance, inspection,
    measurement, operation, adjustment, repair, replacement and other
    maintenance related tasks.

Access required for other purposes such as firefighting and people with
a disability are not included in this term.

-   Accessible, readily: Readily accessible, easily accessible, easy
    access and similar terms mean capable of being reached quickly and
    without climbing over or removing obstructions, using a movable
    ladder, and in any case not more than 2.0 m above the ground, floor
    or platform.

This definition is adapted from AS/NZS 3000.

-   Accredited Testing Laboratory:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   An organisation accredited by the National Association of Testing
    Authorities (NATA) to undertake the relevant tests; or

-   An organisation outside Australia accredited to undertake the
    relevant tests by an authority recognised by NATA through a mutual
    recognition agreement; or

-   An organisation recognised as being an Accredited Testing Laboratory
    under legislation at the time the test was undertaken.

-   An organisation accredited for compliance with ISO/IEC 17025 to
    undertake the relevant tests.

AS ISO/IEC 17025 is identical to ISO/IEC 17025.

-   Appropriately qualified person: To NCC Schedule 3.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Approved: Reviewed, directed, rejected, endorsed and similar
    expressions mean approved (reviewed, directed, rejected, endorsed)
    in writing by the contract administrator.

Approved

As a generic technical specification it is beyond the scope of NATSPEC
to offer any management system to handle the approval process.
Consequently definitions and directions such as approved do not appear
within the worksection text. Where appropriate, a prompt is given
indicating an approval could be required. The extent of approval
responsibilities should take into account the recommendations of the
various professional bodies and should be covered in the agreement with
the client.

If an approval is required prior to implementation consider nominating a
**Hold point**, to eliminate ambiguity.

To add a definition for approval consider including this *Optional*
style text by changing to *Normal* style text.

-   Attendance: Attendance, provide attendance and similar expressions
    mean give assistance for examination and testing.

-   Commissioning: Advancement of an installation from static completion
    to full working order, including verification that the systems,
    sub-systems, and their components meet the project requirements.
    This includes all work described as commissioning in referenced
    documents, even if carried out before static completion.

This definition is taken from SA TS 5342 and amended to include
commissioning work carried out before static completion as required by
some referenced documents.

-   Contract administrator: Has the same meaning as architect or
    superintendent and is the person appointed by the owner or principal
    under the contract.

-   Contractor: Has the same meaning as builder and is the person or
    organisation bound to carry out and complete the work under the
    contract.

-   Default: Specified value, product or installation method which is to
    be provided unless otherwise documented.

-   Design life: The period of time for which it is assumed, in the
    design, that an asset will be able to perform its intended purpose
    with only anticipated maintenance but no major repair or replacement
    being necessary.

-   Design parameters: Information used as the basis for design. It
    includes design requirements, performance criteria, performance
    parameters and similar terms.

-   Documented: Documented, as documented and similar terms mean
    contained in the contract documents.

-   Economic life: The period of time from the acquisition of an asset
    to the time when the asset, while still physically capable of
    fulfilling its function and with only anticipated maintenance,
    ceases to be the lowest cost alternative for satisfying that
    function.

-   Electricity distributor: Any person or organisation that provides
    electricity from an electricity distribution system to one or more
    electrical installations. Includes distributor, supply authority,
    network operator, local network service provider, electricity
    retailer or electricity entity, as may be appropriate in the
    relevant jurisdiction.

This is the definition in AS/NZS 3000. Electricity distributor is
included in Utility service provider.

-   Errors and omissions: For the design prepared by the contractor,
    errors and omissions have the same meaning as defects.

-   Fire hazard properties: To NCC Schedule 3.

-   Gas Network Operator: Has the same meaning as network operator in
    AS/NZS 5601.1.

Gas Network Operator is included in Utility service provider.

-   Geotechnical site investigation: The process of evaluating the
    geotechnical characteristics of the site in the context of existing
    or proposed construction.

-   Give notice: Give notice, submit, advise, inform and similar
    expressions mean give notice (submit, advise, inform) in writing to
    the contract administrator. 

-   High level interface: Systems transfer information in a digital
    format using an open system interface.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Hold point: The activity cannot proceed without the approval of the
    contract administrator.

If applicable consider including this *Optional* style text by changing
to *Normal* style text.

Hold point: Contract administrator intervention of this sort should be
minimised, to avoid blurring of responsibilities, to increase precision
in documentation, to expedite the works, to avoid an adversarial
position and to accord with principles of quality assurance and risk
allocation. In quality assurance terms, approval is a hold point rather
than a witness point - too many approvals may bog the project down.

-   Hot-dip galvanized: Zinc coated to AS/NZS 4680 after fabrication
    with coating thickness and mass to AS/NZS 4680 Table 1.

This applies to galvanizing after fabrication. Galvanized sheet metal
and similar materials are covered by *0183 Metals and prefinishes*.

-   Ingress protection: IP, IP code, IP rating and similar expression
    have the same meaning as IP Code in AS 60529.

-   Joints:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Construction joint: A joint with continuous reinforcement provided
    to suit construction sequence.

-   Contraction joint: An opening control joint with a bond breaking
    coating separating the joint surfaces to allow independent and
    controlled contraction of different parts or components, induced by
    shrinkage, temperature changes or other causes. It may include
    unbound dowels to assist vertical deflection control.

-   Control joint: An unreinforced joint between or within discrete
    elements of construction which allows for relative movement of the
    elements.

-   Expansion joint: A closing control joint with the joint surfaces
    separated by a compressible filler to allow axial movement due to
    thermal expansion or contraction with changes in temperature or
    creep. It may include unbound dowels to assist vertical deflection
    control.

-   Sealant joint: A joint filled with a flexible synthetic compound
    which adheres to surfaces within the joint to prevent the passage of
    dust, moisture and gases.

-   Structural control joint: A control joint (contraction, expansion
    and isolation) in structural elements when used with applied
    material and finishes.

-   Substrate joint: A joint in the substrate which includes
    construction joints and joints between different materials.

-   Weakened plane joint: A contraction joint created by forming a
    groove, extending at least one quarter the depth of the section,
    either by using a grooving tool, by sawing, or by inserting a
    premoulded strip.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Local authority (local council): A body established for the purposes
    of local government by or under a law applying in a state or
    territory.

-   Low level interface: Systems transfer information via terminals and
    voltage free contacts.

-   Manufacturer's recommendations: Recommendations, instructions,
    requirements, specifications (and similar expressions) provided in
    written or other form by the manufacturer and/or supplier relating
    to the suitability, use, installation, storage and/or handling of a
    product.

-   Metallic-coated: Steel coated with zinc or aluminium-zinc alloy as
    follows:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Metallic-coated steel sheet: To AS 1397. Metal thicknesses specified
    are base metal thicknesses.

-   Ferrous open sections zinc coated by an in-line process: To
    AS/NZS 4791.

-   Ferrous hollow sections zinc coated by a continuous or specialised
    process: To AS/NZS 4792.

AS 1397 covers a wide range of finishes, coating grades and materials.
It is used throughout the building industry for cold-formed sections
such as studs, ceiling sections and roofing products. Specifications to
AS 1397 should preferably include the base metal thickness and coating
designations e.g. 1.6 mm galvanized grade G2 steel with Z275 coating.

AS/NZS 4791 and AS/NZS 4792 exclude electrogalvanized (zinc plated)
steel.

-   Network Utility Operator: To NCC Schedule 3. A person who undertakes
    the piped distribution of drinking water or non-drinking water for
    supply; or is the operator of a sewerage system or a stormwater
    drainage system. 

This is the definition in NCC Schedule 3. Network Utility Operator is
included in Utility service provider.

-   Obtain: Obtain, seek and similar expressions mean obtain (seek) in
    writing from the contract administrator.

-   Pipe: Includes pipe and tube.

-   Practical completion or defects free completion: The requirements
    for these stages of completion are defined in the relevant building
    contract for the project.

-   Pre-commissioning: Verifying that the installation of a system is
    complete and ready for commissioning.

This is the definition in SA TS 5342. Pre-commissioning includes
completion of any tests necessary to verify that the system is ready for
commissioning. For example, pressure testing of piping is part of
pre-commissioning while water balancing is part of commissioning.

-   Principal: Principal has the same meaning as owner, client and
    proprietor and is the party to whom the contractor is legally bound
    to construct the works.

-   Professional engineer: To NCC Schedule 3.

In some states and territories, additional or alternative criteria may
apply e.g. Registered Professional Engineer, Queensland (RPEQ).

-   Proprietary: Identifiable by naming the manufacturer, supplier,
    installer, trade name, brand name, catalogue or reference number.

-   Prototype: A full size mock-up of components, systems or elements to
    demonstrate or test construction methods, junctions and finishes,
    and to define the level of quality.

-   Provide: Provide and similar expressions mean supply and install and
    include development of the design beyond that documented.

-   Record drawings: Record drawings has the same meaning as
    as-installed drawings, as-built drawings and work-as-executed
    drawings.

Record drawing is the preferred term for post-construction drawings as
they are usually based on information supplied by the contractor and
others on completion of the work rather than the designer\'s observation
and documentation of the actual construction. As the designer usually
has a limited construction role, certification of Record drawings, if
required, should be by the contractor.

-   Referenced documents: Standards and other documents whose
    requirements are included in this specification by reference.

-   Required: Required by the contract documents, the local or statutory
    authorities.

-   If required: A conditional specification term for work which may be
    shown in the documents or is a legislative requirement.

-   Sample: A physical example that illustrates workmanship, materials
    or equipment, and establishes standards by which the work will be
    judged. It includes samples and sample panels. 

-   Statutory authority: A public sector entity created by legislation,
    that is, a specific law of the Commonwealth, State or Territory.

-   Static completion: The state of a system when installation works are
    complete but have not been commissioned.

This is based on the definition in SA TS 5342. See **Static completion**
for conditions.

-   Subcontractor: A person or organisation, other than the principal,
    having a contract with the contractor for the provision of part of
    the works.

If there is no formal definition in the contract, consider including
this *Optional* style text by changing to *Normal* style text.

-   Supply: Supply, furnish and similar expressions mean supply only.

-   Tests - integrated system: Tests conducted on the project as a
    complete, integrated system to verify successful integration,
    interaction, and operation of all interrelated systems to the
    project requirements.

This is the definition in SA TS 5342.

-   Tests - production: Tests carried out on an item, before delivery to
    the site.

-   Tests - site: Tests carried out on site.

-   Tests - type: Tests carried out on an item identical with a
    production item, including with respect to materials, material
    suppliers, manufacturing processes, dimensions and marking.

-   Tolerance: The permitted difference between the upper limit and the
    lower limit of dimension, value or quantity.

Tolerance is an absolute value without a positive or a negative sign. It
is commonly expressed by ± permitted deviation so that the value of the
tolerance is implicit.

-   Utility service provider: Includes Electricity distributor, Network
    Utility Operator, Gas Network Operator and organisations providing
    other reticulated utilities including data and telecommunications
    services.

-   Verification: Provision of evidence or proof that a performance
    requirement has been met or a default exists.

## Submissions and inspections

### Submissions

Refer to NATSPEC TECHnote GEN 014 on specifying the various
contractor\'s submissions and tests that may be required during the
construction process. Refer to NATSPEC TECHnote GEN 009 for information
on hold points and witness points.

#### General {#general-3 .unnumbered}

Requirement: Make submissions, as documented.

Submit to: contract administrator

Nominate the designated entity, e.g. the contract administrator, or
describe the management system for approvals. Make sure that a procedure
for processing the contractor\'s documents is in place.

Contractor review: Before submitting, review each submission item, and
check for coordination with other work of the contract and conformance
to contract documents.

#### Submission times {#submission-times .unnumbered}

Default timing: Submit information or other material for information,
comment or approval at least 5 working days before ordering products or
starting installation of the respective portion of the works.

Alter, if necessary, to suit the project program and coordinate with any
requirements of the principal. Submission timing in the technical
worksections will override this default timing.

Submission program: Submit a program of proposed submission dates for
the following critical items and major components:

-    

For critical items of equipment or major components consider changing
this *Optional* style text to *Normal* style text.

Submission response times: Allow in the construction program for at
least the following times:

-   Shop drawings: 5 working days

-   Samples and prototypes: 2 working days

-   Manufacturers' or suppliers' recommendations: 2 working days

-   Product data: 2 working days

-   Product/design substitution or modification: 5 working days

Proposed products schedules: If major products are not specified as
proprietary items, submit a schedule of those proposed for use within 3
weeks of site possession.

Notice for requests for variations and related contractual matters can
be nominated here if not in conflict with the contract.

#### Identification {#identification .unnumbered}

Requirement: Identify the project, contractor, subcontractor or
supplier, manufacturer, applicable product, model number and options, as
appropriate and include relevant contract document references.

Non-conformance: Identify proposals that do not conform with project
requirements, and characteristics which may be detrimental to successful
performance of the completed work.

#### Errors {#errors .unnumbered}

Requirement: If a submission contains errors, make a new or amended
submission as appropriate, indicating changes made since the previous
submission.

#### Electronic submissions {#electronic-submissions .unnumbered}

Electronic copies file format: .pdf, .dwg, .ifc

Select file format as required by the principal as appropriate for your
project, e.g. .pdf, .dxf, .dwg, .dwf, .dgn, .rvt, gdl, .ifc. More than
one format may be required, for example, dwg for shop drawings to be
used in coordination, pdf for record drawings and dxf for archival
storage. You may also wish to specify the file format for other
graphics, e.g. jpg, tif.

CAD file format: .dwg, .ifc

Check if the principal requires a particular CAD format. e.g. CAD files
in AutoCAD .dwg format using an agreed layering and drawing convention.

Quantity:  

Include if physical copies of files are required, e.g. 2 sets of CDs.

Transmission medium: cloud-based file sharing

Select the medium to your office policy and/or as required by the
principal, as appropriate for the project.

#### Hard copy submissions {#hard-copy-submissions .unnumbered}

Hard copy quantity: not required

e.g. As follows or as called for in the proposed contract:

-   3 sets as paper prints.

-   1 set as reproducible (plastic film) prints.

Standard contract drawing size:  

Select the size to your office policy and/or as required by the
principal, as appropriate for your project, e.g. A1, B1. If you can
photocopy documents of this size you may not need transparencies -- edit
the subclause to suit.

#### Project requirements {#project-requirements .unnumbered}

Some NATSPEC worksections provide for documenting particular
requirements for shop drawings, contractor's schedules, and other
documentation, including their content. Contractor's submissions may
include manufacturer-generated material and contractor-generated
material, required where selection of important items has been by the
contractor.

General: Submit the following, as documented:

-   Authority approvals: Notes of meetings with regulatory authorities
    and utility service providers whose requirements apply to the work
    and evidence that notices, fees and permits have been sought and
    paid, that utility service provider connections are complete and
    that statutory approvals by the authorities whose requirements apply
    to the work have been received.

-   Building penetrations: Details of the methods to maintain the
    required structural, fire and other properties to [**BUILDING
    PENETRATIONS**](#building-penetrations).

-   Certification: Certificates of conformance to documented
    requirements.

-   Commissioning plan: For the whole of the work to
    [**COMMISSIONING**](#commissioning).

-   Commissioning program: For the whole of the work to
    [**COMMISSIONING**](#commissioning).

-   Design documentation: Drawings, calculations and specifications as
    documented.

-   Electronic facility and asset management information: For the whole
    of the work to [**ELECTRONIC FACILITY AND ASSET MANAGEMENT
    INFORMATION**](#electronic-facility-and-asset-management-information).

-   Execution details: Execution programs, schedules and details of
    proposed methods and equipment. For building services include the
    following:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Embedded services: Proposed method for embedding services in
    concrete walls or floors or chasing into concrete or masonry walls.

-   Fixing of services: Typical details of locations, types and methods
    of fixing services to the building structure.

-   Inaccessible services: If services will be enclosed and not
    accessible after completion, submit proposals for location of
    service runs and fittings.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Fire performance: Evidence of conformity to requirement for
    combustibility, fire hazard properties and fire-resistance of
    building elements.

-   Marking and labelling: Samples and schedules of proposed marking and
    labels to **[MARKING AND LABELLING](#marking-and-labelling).**

-   Operation and maintenance manuals: For the whole of the work to
    [**OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE
    MANUALS**](#operation-and-maintenance-manuals).

-   Products and materials: Products and materials data, including
    manufacturer's technical specifications and drawings, product data
    sheets, type tests results, evidence of conformity to documented
    requirements, product certification, performance and rating tables,
    service connection requirements and installation and maintenance
    recommendations.

Use of product certification makes the process easier in terms of
assessing conformance with requirements and is recommended if available.
Registers of certified products are generally available from
certification agencies. Submission of evidence will not be required if
you possess the relevant current register.

-   Prototypes: Prototypes of components, systems or elements.

Where prototypes are called for in worksections consider setting up a
protocol for approval and for the approved prototype to be the benchmark
of quality for all subsequent work.

-   Records: As-built documents, photographs, system diagrams, schedules
    and logbooks to [**RECORD DRAWINGS**](#record-drawings).

-   Samples: Representative of proposed products and materials and
    including proposals to incorporate samples into the works, if any to
    [**SAMPLES AND PROTOTYPES**](#samples-and-prototypes).

-   Shop drawings: To [**SHOP DRAWINGS**](#shop-drawings).

-   Substitutions: To [**SUBSTITUTIONS**](#substitutions).

-   Tests:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Test reports for testing performed under the contract.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Warranties: To [**WARRANTIES**](#warranties).

### Inspection

An inspection is not a substitute for the contractor\'s supervision nor
an indication of approval. NATSPEC technical worksections assume that
formal quality assurance is not applied to the construction of the
project. If formal quality assurance is applied, the quality control
elements of each worksection may need to be reviewed. The contractor\'s
cost of inspections not documented may, in many circumstances, be added
to the contract sum.

#### Notice {#notice .unnumbered}

Concealment: If notice of inspection is required for parts of the works
that are to be concealed, give notice when the inspection can be made
before concealment.

#### Notification times {#notification-times .unnumbered}

Minimum notice: As documented.

Document in the [**Error! Hyperlink reference not valid.**]().

#### Light levels {#light-levels .unnumbered}

Lighting levels for inspection: To AS/NZS 1680.2.4.

#### Attendance {#attendance .unnumbered}

General: Provide attendance for documented inspections and tests.

Include inspections and tests in the appropriate worksections.

## Performance

### Bushfire-prone areas

#### General {#general-4 .unnumbered}

Bushfire Attack Level (BAL) to AS 3959: as documented in the *AS 3959
Bushfire Attack Level (BAL) Assessment* by in Xero Fire (the project
bush fire consultant).

Select from the following levels: BAL-LOW, BAL-12.5, BAL-19, BAL-29,
BAL-40 or BAL-FZ (Fire Zone). The method of determining the BAL is set
out in AS 3959, Section 2. Contact the local council for the building
site to determine if the site is located in a designated bushfire-prone
area. Even though many councils provide maps of these areas on their
websites, confirm the site\'s status with them directly. Councils may
require a Bushfire Risk Assessment Report (BRAR) stating the BAL to
accompany Development Applications for sites within a designated
bushfire prone area. These can be prepared by a Bushfire Consultant
accredited through the Bushfire Planning and Design (BPAD) Accreditation
Scheme managed by the Fire Protection Association Australia (FPAA). The
BAL recorded at this prompt will determine the design of materials and
forms of construction that should be documented in applicable
worksections. Refer to the BCA 3.10.5 and BCA G5.2 for the classes of
buildings that must conform to AS 3959. State variations apply. See
NATSPEC TECHnote DES 018 on bushfire protection.

Bushfire-resistant design and construction: To  

Document any other bushfire regulatory standard applicable to the site
here.

### Corrosion resistance

#### Atmospheric corrosivity category {#atmospheric-corrosivity-category .unnumbered}

General: Atmospheric corrosivity category as defined in AS 4312:

-   Exterior atmospheric corrosivity category: C4/C5

-   Interior atmospheric corrosivity category: C4/C5

In some NATSPEC worksections, the contractor must select the appropriate
corrosion protection for components from a range of default requirements
for the documented atmospheric corrosivity category.

Select from the following categories: C1 (very low), C2 (low), C3
(medium), C4 (high), C5 (very high) and CX (extreme).

Consider if different aspects of the project require a different
corrosivity category to be nominated (i.e. sheltered side, ancillary
buildings, etc.). Surfaces which are exposed to the prevailing weather
but are not readily washed by rain will usually corrode at a higher
rate. This aspect should be considered when selecting a corrosivity
category.

Note that if categories are C5, CX or T to the AS/NZS 2312 series,
specifiers should seek specialist advice on corrosion protection.

See NATSPEC TECHnote DES 010 for further information on atmospheric
corrosivity categories and specifying atmospheric corrosion protection
systems or products.

See NATSPEC TECHnote DES 045 for further information on corrosion
protection of services items.

Some NATSPEC worksections include default corrosion resistance
requirements that reference other applicable standards. The following
worksections rely on the atmospheric corrosivity categories documented
here for appropriate selection of corrosion resistant materials:

-   *0181 Adhesives, sealants and fasteners*.

-   *0183 Metals and prefinishes*.

-   *0310 Concrete -- combined*.

-   *0313 Concrete post-tensioned*.

-   *0343 Tensioned membrane structures*.

-   *0511 Lining*.

-   *0611 Rendering and plastering*.

#### Galvanizing {#galvanizing .unnumbered}

Severe conditions: Galvanize mild steel components (including fasteners)
to AS/NZS 1214 or AS/NZS 4680 as appropriate, if:

-   Exposed to weather.

-   Embedded in masonry.

-   Exposed to or in air spaces behind the external leaf of masonry
    walls.

-   In contact with chemically treated timber, other than copper chrome
    arsenate (CCA).

#### GREEN STAR {#green-star .unnumbered}

#### General {#general-5 .unnumbered}

Requirement: This project is targeting a 4 Stars equivalency under Green
Star Design and As Built v1.3 rating tool. In this regard, the
Contractor shall comply with all requirements outlined in the ESD
Specification prepared by Cundall (the project ESD consultant).

The Contractor shall specifically comply with the Green Star credits'
requirements of the targeted credits outlined in the ESD consultant's
pathway report and provide all necessary support documentation for
submission to the project's ESD Consultant. Where ESD requirements are
more stringent, the ESD specification takes precedence over other
specifications.

e.g. Design and As Built v1.3, Green Star Buildings.

Design and As Built v1.3 has been superseded by Green Star Buildings.
Projects submitted from 1st January 2022 must comply with the
requirements of Green Star Buildings. Requirements cited for
Green Star Buildings are not necessarily applicable to
Design and As Built v1.3.

Refer to GBCA *Specifying for Green Star Buildings using NATSPEC* for
further information.

### Noise levels

#### General {#general-6 .unnumbered}

Requirement: Install systems to operate within the noise level limits,
as documented for the contract design and documented equipment
performance.

Document in the [**Error! Hyperlink reference not valid.**](). Inclusion
of this schedule does not transfer responsibility for acoustic design to
the contractor. If the contractor supplies the documented equipment and
installs it as documented then their contractual responsibility has been
fulfilled. The function of this schedule is to identify targets for
those details for which the contractor is responsible, e.g. excessive
noise due to poor air balancing.

### Structure

#### General {#general-7 .unnumbered}

Requirement: Provide structures, installations and components in
accordance with all requirements outlined in the STRUCTURAL
Specification prepared by the project structural engineer. If required,
provide structures, installations and components as follows:

-   Fixed accessways: To AS 1657.

-   Structural design actions: To the AS/NZS 1170 series.

The independent application by professionals or specialist contractors
to the requirements of structural codes for the design and construction
of building components or elements is an established and integral part
of the construction process.

See NATSPEC TECHnote DES 009 for an introduction to the limit states
design method for designing and evaluating structures.

Importance level:  

Select the importance level of the structure. Refer to AS/NZS 1170.0
clause 2.2(a) and BCA Table B1.2a.

## Design

### Design development

The *Optional* style text in this clause may be used by changing it to
*Normal* style text, when the contractor is responsible for design that
may require specialist expertise and/or licenced or registered persons.
See NATSPEC TECHreport TR 03 on specifying design and construct for
mechanical services. It discusses some of the issues and presents a
range of approaches for preparing design and construct specifications
that can be applied more generally.

#### General {#general-8 .unnumbered}

Requirement: Complete the design of the work, including development of
the design beyond that documented.

Conflict with the documents: If it is believed that a conflict exists
between statutory requirements and the documents, notify the contract
administrator immediately and provide a recommendation to resolve the
conflict.

Verification and validation: Provide and document a design that can be
verified and validated as conforming to the documented design and
statutory requirements.

Use respective worksections to specify design parameters for components.

Define verifiable outcomes relating to the overall worksection or system
in the respective worksection.

#### Design program {#design-program .Optional-Heading-4 .unnumbered}

Requirement: Submit a program showing the dates for submission of design
documents for the following stages:

-    

Include required stages. An alternative is to specify the required dates
or periods. Typical percentages of design work are:

-   Schematic design: 10% of design.

-   Design development: 50% of design.

-   Completion of design documentation: 100% of design.

Timing of program:  

Insert required timing for submission of the program. Eg Submit the
design program no later than 7 days from the date of execution of the
contract.

#### Staged submissions {#staged-submissions .Optional-Heading-4 .unnumbered}

Timing: Submit the following:

-   Draft specification:  

If copies of the draft are required, insert details of timing.
Alternatively, specifications may be included in the design phase
progress submissions.

-   Tender specification: Submit copies of the tender specification when
    tenders are called.

-   Amendments: Submit copies of amendments to the tender specification
    when they are issued to the contractor.

Requirement: Submit the documented items at the stages as follows:

-    

List the documents and information to be submitted at the nominated
stages and the required timing.

#### Before commencing design {#before-commencing-design .Optional-Heading-4 .unnumbered}

Requirement: Submit the names, qualifications, experience and
registration details of persons responsible for design and
certification.

#### Other submissions {#other-submissions .Optional-Heading-4 .unnumbered}

Requirement: Make documented submissions, not listed above,
progressively before completion of design.

#### Authority approvals {#authority-approvals .Optional-Heading-4 .unnumbered}

Requirement: Obtain authority approvals for the work documented to meet
the construction program.

This would normally include paying fees. Refer to the *Preliminaries*
worksection.

Submissions: Submit the approval documents.

### Designer

The *Optional* style text in this clause may be used by changing it to
*Normal* style text, when the contractor is responsible for design that
may require specialist expertise and/or licenced or registered persons.
See NATSPEC TECHreport TR 03 on specifying design and construct for
mechanical services. It discusses some of the issues and presents a
range of approaches for preparing design and construct specifications
that can be applied more generally.

#### General {#general-9 .unnumbered}

Design by contractor: If the contractor provides design, use only
appropriately qualified persons.

The Definitions clause defines Provide as including design. Much
construction involves a degree of design, even if only in minor matters
left to trade personnel to resolve, such as the location of noggings.

Engineering design by contractor: If the contractor provides engineering
design:

-   Provide design carried out by, or under the supervision of, a
    professional engineer qualified and experienced in the relevant
    field.

*0171 General requirements* cites the NCC definition of professional
engineer that requires a professional engineer to be registered in the
respective field if legislation is applicable (e.g. a Professional
Engineer registered under the *Professional Engineers Act 2002 (Qld)*
or, if no legislation is applicable, is either a corporate member of the
Institution of Engineers, Australia or eligible to become one.

-   Evidence: Signature of a nominated professional engineer in the
    respective discipline to each design document submitted.

-   Insurance: Provide evidence of currency of insurance of the
    engineering designer for professional indemnity insurance and public
    liability.

If insurance is not required, delete this. Consider including an
extension of coverage beyond the end of the defects liability period to
cover latent design defects.

#### Designer\'s services during construction {#designers-services-during-construction .Optional-Heading-4 .unnumbered}

Designer\'s attendance on site:  

e.g. Carry out sufficient site inspections so that the design intent of
the documents prepared by the designer is fulfilled. 

This is a minimum. Other items that might be included are:

-   Review of shop drawings and equipment selections.

-   Review of construction and manufacturer\'s certificates.

-   Witnessing of site tests.

-   Certification that the completed works conform to the documents
    prepared by the designer. Such certification may well be qualified
    as the designer is rarely able to certify work not directly
    witnessed.

### Consultation {#consultation .Optional-Heading-3}

The *Optional* style text in this clause may be used by changing it to
*Normal* style text, when the contractor is responsible for design that
may require specialist expertise and/or licenced or registered persons.
See NATSPEC TECHreport TR 03 on specifying design and construct for
mechanical services. It discusses some of the issues and presents a
range of approaches for preparing design and construct specifications
that can be applied more generally.

Consider the implications of the designer/contractor negotiating with
non-contractual stakeholders particularly their authority to bind the
principal.

#### Regulatory authorities and utility service providers {#regulatory-authorities-and-utility-service-providers .Optional-Heading-4 .unnumbered}

Requirement:  

Include authority requirements (e.g. DA conditions) in the relevant
worksection.

If the contractor is to have authority to deal with statutory
authorities and external stakeholder bodies such as Network Utility
Operators, provide details here. Consider the extent of the authority
that is conferred on the contractor, if this is the case.

#### User groups {#user-groups .Optional-Heading-4 .unnumbered}

Requirement:  

#### Contract administrator {#contract-administrator .Optional-Heading-4 .unnumbered}

Requirement:  

Consider including other stakeholders.

### Alternative design solutions

The *Optional* style text in this clause may be used by changing it to
*Normal* style text, when the contractor is responsible for design that
may require specialist expertise and/or licenced or registered persons.
See NATSPEC TECHreport TR 03 on specifying design and construct for
mechanical services. It discusses some of the issues and presents a
range of approaches for preparing design and construct specifications
that can be applied more generally.

In a design and construct contract, the contractor is responsible for
design. Avoid use of terms such as acceptance by the contract
administrator, as they can be interpreted as the contract administrator
taking on some or all responsibility for design.

#### Conforming alternative design solutions {#conforming-alternative-design-solutions .unnumbered}

General: Proposals for alternative designs that conform to documented
requirements are permitted.

Requirement: If proposing alternative design solutions, submit the
proposed alternative solution with a comparison to the original. Include
the following factors in the comparison:

Safety, health and amenity of building occupants, including maintenance
personnel.

-   Cost.

-   Anticipated life.

-   Energy efficiency.

-   Environmental impact, including greenhouse gas emissions.

-   Effect on construction program.

-   Effect on other trades.

-   Availability of products.

-   Certification requirements.

-   Maintenance requirements.

-   Access for maintenance.

-   Flexibility for future changes.

-   Safety of equipment.

-   Sustainability.

-   Other information required for submission in **SUBSTITUTIONS**.

#### Non-conforming alternative design solutions {#non-conforming-alternative-design-solutions .unnumbered}

Requirement: If the proposed design solution does not conform to the
documented requirements, conform to **SUBSTITUTIONS**.

#### Costs {#costs .unnumbered}

Requirement: Pay the cost of submissions and evaluation and/or testing
of proposed alternatives, whether subsequently adopted or not. The costs
will be calculated at the current charge-out rates of the relevant
consultant.

### Design documents {#design-documents .Optional-Heading-3}

The *Optional* style text in this clause may be used by changing it to
*Normal* style text, when the contractor is responsible for design that
may require specialist expertise and/or licenced or registered persons.
See NATSPEC TECHreport TR 03 on specifying design and construct for
mechanical services. It discusses some of the issues and presents a
range of approaches for preparing design and construct specifications
that can be applied more generally.

#### General {#general-10 .Optional-Heading-4 .unnumbered}

Requirement: Provide calculations, drawing, shop drawings, digital
models and specifications to document a design conforming to the
documented design parameters and statutory requirements, as required.

#### Drawings {#drawings .Optional-Heading-4 .unnumbered}

Requirement: To [**Error! Hyperlink reference not valid.**]().

Drawing registers: Submit drawing registers with the drawings showing
current and previous drawing issues.

#### Specifications {#specifications .Optional-Heading-4 .unnumbered}

Requirement: Provide project specific specification using the NATSPEC
National Master Specification and incorporating this specification by
reference.

The requirement to incorporate this specification by reference is
intended to prevent paraphrasing the specification or replacement with a
completely different specification. Both of these approaches carry the
risk of contradiction or omission of requirements of this specification.
Incorporation by reference does not prevent the contractor from
modifying or expanding this specification to suit the developed design.

Variations from this specification: If it is proposed to depart from the
wording of this specification, submit the proposed changes as documented
in [**Error! Hyperlink reference not valid.**]().

Licence: Provide specifications prepared by a current subscriber to the
applicable NATSPEC package.

Worksections: Use worksections from the current update of NATSPEC and
customise for the project.

Additional material: If the specification requires material not included
in this specification, use worksections from the current update of
NATSPEC and customise for the project.

Additional content: If additional content is required for the project
specification not covered in either this or NATSPEC worksections,
provide additional text using the NATSPEC structure, terminology and
format.

Redundant content: Delete redundant content from the NATSPEC worksection
*Templates*.

### Errors in and omissions from the design {#errors-in-and-omissions-from-the-design .Optional-Heading-3}

The *Optional* style text in this clause may be used by changing it to
*Normal* style text, when the contractor is responsible for design that
may require specialist expertise and/or licenced or registered persons.
See NATSPEC TECHreport TR 03 on specifying design and construct for
mechanical services. It discusses some of the issues and presents a
range of approaches for preparing design and construct specifications
that can be applied more generally.

#### General {#general-11 .Optional-Heading-4 .unnumbered}

Requirement: If the design contains errors and/or omissions, correct the
errors and make a new or amended submission, as appropriate, indicating
changes made since the previous submission.

Notice: Immediately on detecting a design error and/or omission, submit
notification in writing describing the error and/or omission,
anticipated consequences and proposed corrective action.

Consequences of errors and/or omissions: Pay the costs associated with
correcting design errors and/or omissions and minimise the effects of
the errors.

## Products and materials

### General

#### Sources policy {#sources-policy .unnumbered}

General:

-   Have a Sustainable Procurement policy in place and

    Procurement to focus on:

-   Preference for local materials.

-   Avoiding new materials (e.g. exposed ceiling).

-   Preference for reused materials (e.g. reused timber).

-   Materials with high recycling and recyclable content.

-   Materials that have a sustainability certification (e.g. GreenTag,
    EPD, Living Building Challenge, Declare, Living Building Challenge,
    FSC, GECA, Climate Active Carbon Neutral).

e.g. A preference for Australian or New Zealand goods.

#### Consistency {#consistency .unnumbered}

General: For each material or product use the same source or
manufacturer and provide consistent type, size, quality and appearance.

#### Low VOC emitting paints {#low-voc-emitting-paints .unnumbered}

Include this sub-clause if the outgassing of volatile organic compounds
is an issue, e.g. for health and aged care facilities, food premises and
schools. Delete if not required.

Paint types: To the recommendations of AS/NZS 2311 Table 4.2.

Requirement: Provide materials conforming to the following limits for
VOC content:

-   Paints: 16 g/L

-   Trim, varnishes and wood stains: 75 g/L

-   Primers, sealers and prep coats: 65 g/L

#### Prohibited materials {#prohibited-materials .unnumbered}

General: Do not provide the following:

-   Materials, exceeding the limits of those listed, in the Safe Work
    Australia *Hazardous Chemical Information System* (HCIS) Workplace
    exposure standards.

See
[hcis.safeworkaustralia.gov.au/ExposureStandards](http://hcis.safeworkaustralia.gov.au/ExposureStandards)
to search for exposure standards for hazardous substances under the Safe
Work Australia HCIS.

See also
[www.industrialchemicals.gov.au](https://www.industrialchemicals.gov.au/)
for the Australian Industrial Chemicals Introduction Scheme.

-   Blowing agents:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Materials that use chlorofluorocarbon (CFC) or
    hydrochlorofluorocarbon (HCFC) in the manufacturing process.

-   A blowing agent with a global warming potential (GWP) ≥ 700.

ESD provision: Some blowing agents have very high global warming
potential (GWP). Typical values are:

-   HCFC-142b:1800 (HCFC-142b is primarily used in extruded (not
    expanded) polystyrene).

-   HFC-134a:1300.

-   HFC-152a:140.

-   Carbon dioxide: 1. 

### Proprietary items

#### Manufacturer\'s or supplier\'s recommendations {#manufacturers-or-suppliers-recommendations .unnumbered}

General: Provide manufactured items to the manufacturer\'s or
supplier\'s recommendations.

Proprietary items/systems/assemblies: Assemble, install or fix to
substrate to the manufacturer\'s or supplier\'s recommendations.

Project modifications: Advise of activities that supplement, or are
contrary to the manufacturer\'s or supplier\'s recommendations.

#### Identification of proprietary items {#identification-of-proprietary-items .unnumbered}

Sealed containers: If items are supplied by the manufacturer in closed
or sealed containers or packages, bring them to point of use in the
original containers or packages.

Other items: Marked to show the following, as applicable:

-   Manufacturer's identification.

-   Brand name.

-   Product type.

-   Quantity.

-   Reference code and batch number.

-   Date of manufacture.

Edit the list to suit the project or delete if not required. 

### Substitutions

#### General {#general-13 .unnumbered}

Refer to NATSPEC TECHnote GEN 006 on generic and proprietary
specification and the procedure for substitution of specified products.

Identified proprietary items: Identification of a proprietary item does
not necessarily imply exclusive preference for the identified item, but
indicates the necessary properties of the item.

Alternatives: If alternatives to the documented products, methods or
systems are proposed, submit sufficient information to permit evaluation
of the proposed alternatives, including the following:

-   Product, method or system identification.

-   Manufacturer\'s contact details.

-   Detailed comparison between the properties of the documented product
    and proposed substitution.

-   Details of manufacturer and/or installer warranty.

-   Statement of NCC compliance, if applicable.

-   Evidence of conformity to a cited standard.

-   Evidence that the performance is at least equal to that specified.

-   Samples.

-   Essential technical information, in English.

-   Reasons for the proposed substitutions.

-   Statement of the extent of revisions to the contract documents.

-   Statement of the extent of revisions to the construction program.

-   Statement of cost implications including costs outside the contract.

-   Statement of consequent alterations to other parts of the works.

Availability: If the documented products or systems are unavailable
within the time constraints of the construction program, submit
evidence.

Criteria: If the substitution is for any reason other than
unavailability, submit evidence that the substitution:

-   Is of net enhanced value to the principal.

-   Is consistent with the contract documents and is as effective as the
    identified item, detail or method.

Costs: Pay the cost of submissions and of evaluations and tests of
proposed alternatives, whether subsequently adopted or not. The costs
will be calculated at the current charge-out rates of the relevant
consultant(s).

Consider changing this *Optional* style text to *Normal* style text, if
contractor is to pay costs associated with substitution.

### Samples and prototypes

#### General {#general-14 .unnumbered}

Document specific requirements for samples in the appropriate
worksection. If a contractor's submission is rejected, reasons should be
given. Consider setting up a procedure for acceptance criteria,
re-submission, storage and location, and verification with site
deliveries.

Incorporation of samples: Only incorporate samples that have been
endorsed for inclusion in the works. Do not incorporate other samples.

Retention of samples: Keep endorsed samples in good condition on site,
until the date for practical completion.

Unincorporated samples: Remove on completion.

### Shop drawings

#### General {#general-15 .unnumbered}

Refer to NATSPEC TECHnote GEN 004 on shop drawings and samples. Document
specific requirements for shop drawings in the appropriate worksection.
If a contractor's submission is rejected, reasons should be given.
Consider setting up a procedure for acceptance criteria and
re-submission.

Documentation: Include dimensioned drawings showing details of the
fabrication and installation of structural elements, building
components, services and equipment, including relationship to building
structure and other services, cable type and size, and marking details.

Diagrammatic layouts: Coordinate work shown diagrammatically in the
contract documents, and prepare dimensioned set-out drawings.

Services coordination: Coordinate with other building and service
elements. Show adjusted positions on the shop drawings.

It may be necessary to reword this clause to suit specific contractual
situations (e.g. a trade package specification).

Coordination is the responsibility of the contractor and will be covered
directly or indirectly in the contract (and subcontracts). Where
services are carried out as subcontracts the use of any coordination
clause would be in essence to define and remind the contractor and in
turn the subcontractors of their contractual obligations in general. For
services it may be necessary to specifically define installation or
execution, however generalised coordination clauses that are implicit in
the contractual responsibilities should be avoided or used with extreme
caution. e.g. coordinate with other above ceiling services, structure,
ceiling suspension etc.

Space requirements: Check space and access for maintenance requirements
of equipment and services indicated diagrammatically in the contract
documents.

Commissioning requirements: Show provisions for testing and
commissioning on the drawings.

e.g. Location of test and adjustment points.

Access for maintenance: Show space and provisions for access for
maintenance.

e.g. Space for removal of components and means of access.

Building work drawings for building services: On dimensioned drawings
show the following:

-   Access doors and panels.

-   Conduits to be cast in slabs.

-   Holding down bolts and other anchorage and/or fixings required
    complete with loads to be imposed on the structure during
    installation and operation.

-   Openings, penetrations and block-outs.

-   Sleeves.

-   Plinths, kerbs and bases.

-   Required external openings.

Submission medium: Electronic

Electronic or Hard copy. Nominate alternatives or include both.

Drawing size:  

Nominate minimum drawing size. 

Standard:  

Nominate drawings to AS 1100.101, AS 1100.201, AS 1100.301, AS 1100.401
and AS/NZS 1100.501 as applicable.

CAD base drawings:   

If CAD drawings are to be provided to the main contractor for use in the
preparation of shop drawings, advise the conditions that will apply,
including charges, restrictions on the use and disclaimers. The
provision of CAD files to third parties is a contractual issue between
the consultant and the client and should be addressed in the
Client/Consultant agreements.

Record drawings: Amend all documented shop drawings to include changes
made during the progress of the work and up to the end of the defects
liability period.

See also **RECORD DRAWINGS**.

## Ancillary building work

WHS legislation has been harmonised across Australia. QLD, NSW, ACT,
TAS, SA and NT have enacted the model Act and Regulations. Refer to the
Construction Work Code of Practice for contractor responsibilities and
to the Safe Design of Structures Code of Practice for designer
responsibilities at
[www.safeworkaustralia.gov.au](http://www.safeworkaustralia.gov.au/).

For VIC and WA which are yet to adopt the legislation refer to the
National Standard for Construction (NOHSC 1016).

### Wall chasing

#### Holes and chases {#holes-and-chases .unnumbered}

General: If holes and chases are required in masonry walls, make sure
structural integrity of the wall is maintained. Do not chase walls with
a fire-resistance level or an acoustic rating.

Parallel chases or recesses on opposite faces of a wall: Not closer than
600 mm to each other.

Consider adding an additional skin for chasing.

Chasing blockwork: Only chase core-filled hollow blocks or solid blocks
which are not documented as structural.

#### Concrete blockwork chasing table {#concrete-blockwork-chasing-table .unnumbered}

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  Block thickness (mm)                Maximum depth of chase (mm)
  ----------------------------------- -----------------------------------
  190                                 35

  140                                 25

  90                                  20
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

 

### Fixing

#### General {#general-16 .unnumbered}

Suitability: If equipment is not suitable for fixing to non-structural
building elements, fix directly to structure and trim around
penetrations in non-structural elements.

#### Fasteners {#fasteners .unnumbered}

General: Use proprietary fasteners capable of transmitting the loads
imposed, and sufficient for the rigidity of the assembly.

### Building penetrations

See also BCA F5 and BCA Spec F5.2 for services penetrations requirements
to limit sound transmission.

Penetration sealing systems often comprise ceramic fibres derived from
alumina and silica melts. These are a class of man-made vitreous fibres
(MMF), synthetic mineral fibre, and statutory Work Health and Safety
provisions may apply to their use. Refer to
*Guide to handling refractory ceramic fibres*.

#### Penetrations {#penetrations .unnumbered}

Requirement: Maintain the required structural integrity, fire
performance, waterproofing performance and other properties when
penetrating or fixing to the following:

-   Structural building elements including external walls, fire walls,
    fire doors and access panels, other tested and rated assemblies or
    elements, floor slabs and beams.

-   Membrane elements including damp-proof courses, waterproofing
    membranes and roof coverings. If penetrating membranes, provide a
    waterproof seal between the membrane and the penetrating component.

#### Sealing {#sealing .unnumbered}

Delete this subclause if using *0182 Fire-stopping*.

Fire-resisting building elements: Seal penetrations with a system
conforming to AS 4072.1.

Non fire-resisting building elements: Seal penetrations around conduits
and sleeves. Seal around cables within sleeves. If the building element
is acoustically rated, maintain the rating.

#### Sleeves {#sleeves .unnumbered}

General: If piping, cables or conduits penetrate building elements,
provide metal or PVC-U sleeves formed from pipe sections as follows:

-   Movement: Arrange to permit normal pipe or conduit movement.

-   Diameter (for non fire-resisting building elements): Sufficient to
    provide a ring shaped space around the pipe or pipe insulation of at
    least 12 mm.

-   Ferrous surfaces: Prime paint.

-   Sealing: Seal between pipes or conduits and sleeves to prevent the
    entry of vermin.

-   Terminations:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Cover plates fitted: Flush with the finished building surface.

-   Fire-resisting and acoustic rated building elements: 50 mm beyond
    finished building surface.

-   Floors draining to floor wastes: 50 mm above finished floor.

-   Other locations: 5 mm beyond finished building surface.

-   Termite management: To AS 3660.1.

Additional state requirements may apply under the NCC.

-   Thickness:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Metal: 1 mm or greater.

-   PVC-U: 3 mm or greater.

### Support of plant and equipment

#### Concrete plinths {#concrete-plinths .unnumbered}

General: Provide concrete plinths as documented and under all equipment
located on concrete floor slabs as follows:

Preferably show the plinths on the drawings including the height and
type of plinth, e.g. strip plinths, pads only under equipment mounts.

-   Surround: Zinc (hot-dipped) coated steel, at least 75 mm high and
    1.6 mm thick. Fix to the floor with masonry anchors. Fill with
    concrete.

-   Height: 75 mm or greater, as documented.

-   Reinforcement: Single layer of F62 fabric.

-   Concrete: Grade N20.

-   Finish: Steel float, flush with top edge of the surround.

#### Support of ground level plant and equipment {#support-of-ground-level-plant-and-equipment .unnumbered}

Ground level: Conform to the following:

-   If the ground slope is 15° or more, or the area of the plant and
    equipment is extensive, obtain the advice of a professional engineer
    for the documentation of a suitable slab or platform.

-   In all other cases, provide proprietary plastic or concrete supports
    installed with falls that achieve a raised, impervious and water
    shedding bearing surface.

Balustrades: If balustrades or screening are required, obtain the advice
of a registered architect.

#### Support of plant and equipment mounted on roofs or elevated platforms {#support-of-plant-and-equipment-mounted-on-roofs-or-elevated-platforms .unnumbered}

Platforms: If a platform is required, or the area of the plant and
equipment mounted on roofs or elevated platforms is extensive, obtain
the advice of a professional engineer for the documentation of a
suitable platform.

Balustrades: If balustrades or screening are required, obtain the advice
of a registered architect.

Roof level support: If any of the following apply to roof level support,
obtain the advice of a professional engineer:

-   The total load from any unit of plant or equipment exceeds 500 kg.

-   The load from a unit of plant or equipment to any single support
    point exceeds 100 kg.

-   The average loading of plant and equipment over the area extending
    1 m on all sides beyond the plant and equipment exceeds 25 kg/m².

### Seismic restraint of non-structural components

#### General {#general-17 .unnumbered}

Earthquake design category: II

Insert earthquake design category. Refer to AS 1170.4 Section 5.

Seismic restraint to AS 1170.4: Not required

Insert Required or Not required. Obtain a structural engineer\'s advice
on the need for seismic restraint. Refer to NATSPEC TECHnote DES 030 for
further information.

#### Provisions {#provisions .Optional-Heading-4 .unnumbered}

General: Arrange all components, other than service items exempted in
AS 1170.4, to resist seismic loads determined in conformance with
AS 1170.4. Securely fix all plant and equipment to the building
structure. Do not rely on gravity and/or friction to resist seismic
forces.

Anti-vibration mounts: Use horizontally restrained type.

Components: Do not use components that will be damaged by earthquake
conditions. Protect systems against the adverse effects of components
such as tilt switches that, although not damaged by earthquake, may
malfunction.

Engineering services: To the recommendations of *SA Gov G172 Seismic
restraint of engineering services*.

Design to resist horizontal movement. AS 1170.4 clause 8.3 gives a
simplified method of calculating forces on components. In
earthquake-prone areas, switchboards should be bolt-fixed. Tanks and the
like need to be horizontally restrained as gravity alone is not
sufficient to meet the requirements of the standard.

See AS 1170.4 clause 8.1.4 for exemptions for some service components.

If seismic restraint is required, consider including this *Optional*
style text by changing to *Normal* style text.

## Building services

### Services connections

If negotiation of arrangements for connection to utility service
provider services has been finalised, make sure the specification
includes the agreements and conditions.

#### Connections {#connections .unnumbered}

General: Connect to utility service provider services or service points.
Excavate to locate and expose connection points. Reinstate the surfaces
and facilities that have been disturbed.

#### Utility service provider requirements {#utility-service-provider-requirements .unnumbered}

General: If the utility service provider elects to perform or supply
part of the works, make the necessary arrangements. Install equipment
supplied, but not installed, by the utility service provider.

### Services installation

#### General {#general-18 .unnumbered}

Fixing: If non-structural building elements are not suitable for fixing
services to, fix directly to structure and trim around penetrations in
non-structural elements.

Installation: Install equipment and services as follows:

-   Plumb and securely fixed.

-   Allow for movement in both structure and services.

-   Arrange services running together, parallel to each other and
    adjacent building elements.

Concealment: Conceal all cables, ducts, trays and pipes except where
installed in plant spaces, ceiling spaces and riser cupboards or
documented to be exposed. If alternative routes are available, do not
locate on external walls.

Lifting: Provide heavy items of equipment with permanent fixtures for
lifting to the manufacturer\'s recommendations.

Suspended ground floors: Keep all parts of services suspended under
ground floors at least 150 mm clear of the ground surface. Make sure
services do not impede access.

#### Dissimilar metals {#dissimilar-metals .unnumbered}

Jointing: Join dissimilar metals with fittings of electrolytically
compatible material.

#### Temporary capping {#temporary-capping .unnumbered}

Pipe ends: During construction, protect open ends of pipe with metal or
plastic covers or caps.

#### Piping {#piping .unnumbered}

General: Install piping in straight lines at uniform grades without
sags. Arrange to prevent air locks. Provide sufficient unions, flanges
and isolating valves to allow removal of piping and fittings for
maintenance or replacement of plant.

Spacing: Provide at least 25 mm clear between pipes and between pipes
and building elements, additional to insulation.

Changes of direction: Provide as follows:

-   If practicable, long radius elbows or bends and sets, and swept
    branch connections.

-   If pipes are led up or along walls and then through to fixtures,
    provide elbows or short radius bends.

-   Do not provide mitred fittings.

Vibration: Arrange and support piping to prevent vibration whilst
permitting necessary movement. Minimise the number of joints.

Embedded pipes: Do not embed pipes that operate under pressure in
concrete or surfacing material.

Delete if not appropriate.

The embedding of pipes under pressure in concrete is widely regarded as
poor practice and to be avoided. Some standards such as AS 2118.9
prohibit embedding entirely while others discourage the practice. *0314
Concrete in situ* requires that concrete not be poured until pressure
testing has been successfully completed.

For gas piping embedded in concrete see AS/NZS 5601.1 clause 5.3.13.

Embedded pipes: If pipes that operate under pressure are to be embedded
in concrete or surfacing material conform to AS 2896 clause 4.3.3.4.
Pressure test and rectify leaks before the concrete is poured.

If embedding pipes under pressure is to be permitted, consider changing
this *Optional* style text by changing to *Normal* style text and
deleting the text prohibiting embedded pipes.

The precautions in AS 2896 are used here for situations where embedding
cannot be avoided.

Valve groupings: If possible, locate valves in groups.

Pressure testing precautions: Isolate items not rated for the test
pressure. Restrain pipes and equipment to prevent movement during
pressure testing.

#### Support and structure {#support-and-structure .unnumbered}

Requirement: Provide incidental supports and structures to suit the
services.

The definition of provide in **Definitions** includes development of
design beyond that documented. This subclause is intended to cover minor
incidental structures only where the design can be safely left to the
contractor. Major structures, screens and so on should be included in
the tender documents.

#### Pipe support systems {#pipe-support-systems .unnumbered}

General: Provide proprietary support systems of metallic-coated steel
construction.

Vertical pipes: Provide anchors and guides to maintain long pipes in
position, and supports designed for the mass of the pipe and its
contents.

Saddles: Provide saddle supports only on DN 25 or smaller pipes.

Dissimilar metals: If pipe and support materials are dissimilar, provide
industrial grade electrically non-conductive material securely bonded to
the pipe to separate them. Provide fasteners of electrolytically
compatible material.

Uninsulated pipes: Clamp piping supports directly to pipes.

Insulated pipes:

-   Spacers: Provide spacers at least as thick as the insulation between
    piping supports and pipes. Extend either side of the support by at
    least 20 mm.

-   Spacer material: Rigid insulation material of sufficient strength to
    support the piping and suitable for the temperature application.

Support spacing: As follows:

-   Cold and heated water pipes: To AS/NZS 3500.1 Table 5.6.4. Provide
    additional brackets, clips or hangers to prevent pipe movement
    caused by water pressure effects.

The NCC cites AS/NZS 3500.1:2018 Pipe support spacing requirements vary
considerably from application to application. For more information on
pipe supports, see NATSPEC TECHnote DES 019.

-   Sanitary plumbing: To AS/NZS 3500.2 Table 10.2.1.

The NCC cites AS/NZS 3500.2:2018.

-   Fuel gas: To AS/NZS 5601.1 Table 5.5.

-   Other pipes: To AS/NZS 3500.1 Table 5.6.4.

#### Hanger size table {#hanger-size-table .unnumbered}

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  Nominal pipe size (DN)              Minimum hanger diameter for single
                                      hangers (mm)
  ----------------------------------- -----------------------------------
  50 maximum                          10

  65 to 90                            12

  100 to 125                          16

  150 to 200                          20
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

 

Delete if conflict with selected proprietary system. This table is
derived from AS/NZS 5601.1 Table 5.6. If two hangers are used at a
support AS/NZS 5601.1 permits the hanger to be reduced by one standard
size for rods over 10 mm.

#### Differential movement {#differential-movement .unnumbered}

For buildings supported independently of the underlying ground,
differential movements can occur between the suspended ground floor of
the building and the ground in which the pipes are buried. Examples
include piered slabs constructed on fill-as-formwork or on void formers
on reactive ground (also referred to as expansive soil).

If there is no geotechnical site investigation report predicting
differential movement, delete reference to the report and specify a
value or values of movements to be accommodated under **Magnitude**. If
no provision is required, delete this subclause.

General: If the geotechnical site investigation report predicts
differential movements between buildings and the ground in which pipes
or conduits are buried, provide control joints in the pipes or conduits,
as follows:

The control joint is most appropriately located at the point where the
pipe or conduit is last effectively restrained by the building (either
at the point of building-in or at the last supporting strap where the
pipe or conduit is hung from the structure).

-   Arrangement: Arrange pipes and conduits to minimise the number of
    control joints.

-   Magnitude: Accommodate the predicted movements.

### Plant and equipment

#### General {#general-19 .unnumbered}

Location: Locate so failure of plant and equipment (including leaks)
does not create a hazard for the building occupants and causes a minimum
or no damage to the building, its finishes and contents including water
sensitive equipment or finishes.

Edit to suit project. For example in hospitals and similar situations
extend to exclude locations over patients who may not be able to move to
avoid leaks.

Safe tray and an overflow pipe: Provide to each tank, hot water heater
and storage vessel.

### Access for maintenance

This clause draws on the recommendations in the
*Defence Works Functional Standard Design and Maintenance Guide 08*
which provides extensive information on good practice for maintenance
access. Other considerations may also apply, for example, separation of
noisy plant from other plant, and storage and handling of hazardous
(e.g. water treatment chemicals), flammable and corrosive materials.

See also NATSPEC TECHreport TR 07 for information on providing access
for maintenance.

Adequate safe and convenient access is essential if the building and its
services are to be maintained so they achieve their economic life and
maintain energy efficiency. Minimum access provisions are those needed
to comply with Work Health and Safety regulations but this minimum will
not necessarily be sufficient to meet other objectives of maintenance.

The provision of maintenance access is the responsibility of both the
designer and the contractor. The designer is responsible to the extent
that it is documented in the contract documents and the contractor when
documented in shop drawings or determined on site.

Make sure that the other contract documents do not conflict with the
requirements of this clause (for example, showing plant in poorly
accessible locations).

Make sure intended access is shown on the drawings and that the plant is
arranged to permit inspection, maintenance and removal. This is
particularly true of high level equipment and roof mounted equipment.

#### General {#general-20 .unnumbered}

Requirement: Provide access for maintenance of all items requiring
inspection, measurement, operation, adjustment, repair, replacement and
other maintenance-related tasks.

Standards: Conform to the relevant requirements of AS 1657, AS 1892.1,
AS 2865 and AS/NZS 3666.1.

The need to conform to these standards will depend on design decisions,
for example the location of plant requiring elevated platforms and
ladders to AS 1657 or the creation of confined spaces to AS 2865 (see
clause 1.5.5 for the definition of a confined space). A preferable
solution is for the designer to avoid, or at least minimise, the need
for these and for the contractor to do likewise.

Work Health and Safety: Conform to the requirements of the applicable
Work Health and Safety regulations.

Refrigerated or cooling plant: If the space is a refrigerated or cooling
chamber inside a duct, air handling plant or similar, provided with an
access door or personnel access panel and of sufficient size for a
person to enter, provide the following to BCA G1.2:

-   An access door.

-   Internal lighting with external indicator lamp.

-   An alarm.

BCA G1.2 deals with \"a refrigerated or cooling chamber, strongroom or
vault\" and is aimed at preventing people working inside small spaces
from becoming trapped and to enable them escape in an emergency. The
minimum clear door size to BCA G1.2 is 600 mm wide by 1500 mm high.

Protection from injury: Protect personnel from injury caused by contact
with objects including those that are sharp, hot or protrude at low
level.

Plant room flooring surfaces: R10 Slip resistance classification to
AS 4586.

See SA HB 197 and SA HB 198 for guidance on classification for specific
uses.

Trip hazards: Do not run small services including drains and conduits
across floors where they may be a trip hazard.

Running services across floors should be avoidable given adequate
design, e.g. floor wastes located beside air handling units. If
unavoidable provide tapered checker floor plate fixed to the floor
structure.

Manufacturer\'s standard equipment: If necessary, modify manufacturer's
standard equipment to provide the plant access documented.

#### Clearances {#clearances .unnumbered}

Minimum clearances for access: Conform to the following:

-   Vertical clearance: ≥ 2100 mm, vertically above horizontal floors,
    ground and platforms.

2100 mm is recommended in
*Defence Works Functional Standard Design and Maintenance Guide 08*.
2000 mm is the minimum in AS 1657. Other clearances apply for sloping
surfaces, stairs and ladders.

-   Horizontal clearance: Preferably ≥ 750 mm clear, but in no case less
    than 600 mm between equipment or between equipment and building
    features including walls.

750 mm is recommended in
*Defence Works Functional Standard Design and Maintenance Guide 08.*
600 mm is the minimum in AS 1657.

-   If tools are required to operate, adjust or remove equipment,
    provide sufficient space so the tools can be used in their normal
    manner and without requiring the user to employ undue or awkward
    force.

For example, sufficient space to swing a spanner in the normal way or
twist a standard screwdriver.

-   Hinged or removable components: To the manufacturer\'s
    recommendations.

For example, burners and chiller headers.

-   Within plant items: Conform to the preceding requirements, and not
    less than the clearances recommended in BS 8313.

#### Elevated services other than in occupied areas {#elevated-services-other-than-in-occupied-areas .unnumbered}

Access classifications:

-   Access class A: Readily accessible. Provide clear and immediate
    access to and around plant items. If plant or equipment is located
    more than 2.0 m above the ground, floor or platform, provide a
    platform with handrails accessible by a stair, all to AS 1657.

-   Access class B: If the plant item requiring access is located more
    than 2.0 m above the ground, floor or platform, provide a platform
    with handrails accessible by a non-vertical ladder, all to AS 1657.

Access class B is similar to class A but omits the readily accessible
requirement and permits the provision of a ladder instead of stairs.

-   Access class C: Locate plant so temporary means of access conforming
    to Work Health and Safety regulations can be provided.

Temporary means of access: Make sure there is adequate provision in
place which is safe and effective.

Temporary means of access includes portable ladders, cherry pickers and
temporary staging. For example, if access is to be by portable ladder it
must be able to be used in conformance with AS 1892.5.

Areas in which access is restricted to authorised maintenance personnel:
Provide access as follows:

-   Instruments, gauges and indicators (including warning and indicating
    lights) requiring inspection at any frequency: Readily accessible.

-   Access required monthly or more frequently: Access class A.

-   Access required between monthly and six monthly: Access class A or
    B.

-   Access required less frequently than six monthly: Access class A, B
    or C.

These frequencies follow the recommendation of
*Defence Works Functional Standard Design and Maintenance Guide 08*.
Adjust if necessary to suit the project.

Other areas: Provide access as follows:

-   Locate to minimise inconvenience and disruption to building
    occupants or damage to the building structure or finishes.

-   In suspended ceilings, locate items of equipment that require
    inspection and/or maintenance above tiled parts. If not possible,
    provide access panels where located above set plaster or other
    inaccessible ceilings. Arrange services and plant locations to
    reduce the number of access panels. Coordinate with other trades to
    use common access panels where feasible.

-   Do not locate equipment requiring access above partitions.

-   Instruments, gauges and other items requiring inspection at any
    frequency: Readily accessible.

-   Labelling: If equipment is concealed in ceilings, provide marking to
    [**MARKING AND LABELLING**](#marking-and-labelling), [**Equipment
    concealed in ceilings**](#equipment-concealed-in-ceilings).

#### Facilities for equipment removal and replacement {#facilities-for-equipment-removal-and-replacement .unnumbered}

This can be a major issue in equipment layout and is preferably
addressed at the design stage and not left to the contractor. Common
heavy and/or large items include compressors, pumps and motors. Allowing
sufficient space for temporary lifting equipment is usually more cost
effective and useful than providing permanent facilities such as lifting
eyes.

Requirement: Provide facilities to permit removal from the building and
replacement of plant and equipment, including space large enough to
accommodate it and any required lifting and/or transportation equipment.
Arrange plant so large and/or heavy items can be moved with the minimum
changes of direction.

Removal of components: Allow sufficient space for removal and
replacement of equipment components including air filters, tubes of
shell and tube heat exchangers, removable heat exchanger bundles, coils
and fan shafts. Provide access panels or doors large enough to permit
the safe removal and replacement of components within air handling
units.

#### Facilities for access {#facilities-for-access .unnumbered}

Equipment behind hinged doors: Provide doors opening at least 150°.

Equipment behind removable panels: Provide panels with quick release
fasteners or captive metal thread screws.

Removable panels: Provide handles to permit easy and safe removal and
replacement.

Insulated plant and services: If insulation must be removed to access
plant and services for maintenance, arrange it to allow for removal and
replacement without damage.

See *0744 Ductwork insulation* and *0752 Mechanical piping insulation*
which contain a number of relevant clauses. See, for example, **EXTERNAL
INSULATION - LAMINATE FACED AND METAL SHEATHED** in *0744 Ductwork
insulation* and **INSULATION - GENERALLY**, **Pump and valve
insulation** in *0752 Mechanical piping insulation*.

#### Piping {#piping-1 .unnumbered}

Requirement: Conform to the following:

-   Provide access and clearance at fittings which require maintenance,
    inspection or servicing, including control valves and joints
    intended to permit pipe removal.

-   Arrange piping so it does not interfere with the removal or
    servicing of associated equipment or valves or block access or
    ventilation openings.

-   Preferably run piping, conduits, cable trays and ducts at high level
    and drop vertically to equipment.

This minimises intrusion of these services into the maintenance space.

#### Electrical equipment and controls {#electrical-equipment-and-controls .unnumbered}

Electrical equipment: Provide clearances and access space to
AS/NZS 3000.

Switchboards and electrical control equipment: Locate near the main
entrance to plant space and with switchboards visible from the plant
being operated.

Control panels: Locate near and visible from the plant being controlled.

### Vibration suppression

This clause is intended to be a broad statement of requirements. Specify
project specific details of vibration and noise requirements, taking
into account the building structure, usage and similar factors. See also
AIRAH DA02.

#### General {#general-21 .unnumbered}

Requirement: Minimise the transmission of vibration from rotating or
reciprocating equipment to other building elements.

#### Standard {#standard .unnumbered}

Machinery noise and vibration: Vibration severity in Zone A to
ISO 20816-1 and ISO 10816-3.

According to ISO 20816-1, the vibration of newly commissioned machines
normally falls within Zone A. Although the standards are applicable to
pumps, fans and motors, ISO 10816-3 excludes some common machine types
such as reciprocating compressors. See ISO 10816-3 clause 1 for the list
of inclusions and exclusions.

#### Speeds {#speeds .unnumbered}

General: If no maximum speed is prescribed, do not exceed 1500 r/min for
direct driven equipment.

#### Connections {#connections-1 .unnumbered}

General: Provide flexible connections to rotating machinery and
assemblies containing rotating machinery. Isolate pipes by incorporating
sufficient flexibility into the pipework or by use of proprietary
flexible pipe connections installed to prevent placing stress on pipes
due to end reaction.

#### Inertia bases {#inertia-bases .unnumbered}

General: If necessary to achieve the required level of vibration
isolation, provide inertia bases having appropriate mass and to the
following:

-   Construction: Steel or steel-framed reinforced concrete with
    reinforcing bars welded between base sections. Position foundation
    bolts for equipment before pouring concrete.

-   Supports: Support on vibration isolation mountings using height
    saving support brackets.

Not all rotating equipment requires an inertia base so the need should
be determined by calculation on a case by case basis. The need for the
extra mass of an inertia base depends on factors including the mass of
the vibrating equipment, the flexibility of the floor, characteristics
of the anti-vibration mounts and the permitted vibration transmission.
For example, a centrifugal pump located in a basement plantroom with a
slab-on-grade floor is unlikely to need an inertia base.

#### Vibration isolation mountings {#vibration-isolation-mountings .unnumbered}

General: Except for external equipment that is not connected to the
structure of any building, support rotating or reciprocating equipment
on mountings as follows:

-   For static deflections \< 15 mm: Single or double deflection
    neoprene in-shear mountings incorporating steel top and base plates
    and a tapped hole for bolting to equipment.

-   For static deflections ≥ 15 mm: Spring mountings.

Selection: Provide mountings selected to achieve 95% isolation
efficiency at the normal operating speeds of the equipment.

Installation: Set and adjust vibration isolation mounting supports to
give clearance for free movement of the supports.

Spring mountings: Provide freestanding laterally stable springs as
follows:

-   Clearances: ≥ 12 mm between springs and other members such as bolts
    and housing.

-   High frequency isolation: 5 mm neoprene acoustic isolation pads
    between baseplate and support.

-   Levelling: Provide bolts and lock nuts.

-   Minimum travel to solid: ≥ 150% of the designated minimum static
    deflection.

-   Ratio of mean coil diameter to compressed length at the designated
    minimum static deflection: ≥ 0.8:1.

-   Snubbing: Snub the springs to prevent bounce at start-up.

-   Vertical resilient limit stops: To prevent spring extension when
    unloaded, to serve as blocking during erection and which remain out
    of contact during normal operation.

### Finishes to building services

#### General {#general-22 .unnumbered}

Requirement: If exposed to view (including in plant rooms), paint
building services and equipment.

Surfaces painted or finished off-site: Conform to *0183 Metals and
prefinishes*.

*0183 Metals and prefinishes* includes anodising, metal spraying,
air-dry enamel, stoving enamel and prepainting. See also *0344 Steel --
hot-dip galvanized coatings* and *0345 Steel -- protective paint
coatings*.

Exceptions: Do not paint chromium or nickel plating, anodised aluminium,
GRP, stainless steel, non-metallic flexible materials and normally
lubricated machined surfaces. Surfaces with finishes applied off-site
need not be re-painted on-site provided the corrosion resistance of the
finish is not less than that of the respective finish documented.

Standard: Conform to the recommendations of AS/NZS 2311 Sections 3, 6
and 7 or AS 2312.1 Sections 6, 7 and 8, as applicable.

Inaccessible surfaces: If surfaces are inaccessible after installation,
complete finish before installation.

#### Painting systems {#painting-systems .unnumbered}

New unpainted interior surfaces: To AS/NZS 2311 Table 5.1.

New unpainted exterior surfaces: To AS/NZS 2311 Table 5.2.

Colour coding: To AS 1345 as noted in [**Error! Hyperlink reference not
valid.**]().

#### Paint application {#paint-application .unnumbered}

Coats: Apply the first coat immediately after substrate preparation and
before contamination of the substrate can occur. Make sure each coat of
paint or clear finish is uniform in colour, gloss, thickness and texture
and free of runs, sags, blisters or other discontinuities.

Combinations: Do not combine paints from different manufacturers in a
paint system.

Protection: Remove fixtures before starting to paint and refix in
position undamaged when painting is complete.

#### Underground metal piping {#underground-metal-piping .unnumbered}

Underground ABS and PVC-U pipelines are covered in the referenced
standards and are a viable alternative to metal pipe and protection.

Requirement: Provide corrosion protection for the following:

-   Underground ferrous piping.

-   Underground non-ferrous metal piping in chemically aggressive soils
    and environments.

Corrosion protection: Select from the following:

This allows the contractor to select, delete unacceptable alternatives.
Consider cathodic protection in aggressive soils such as clays or fill.
If the soil is known to be corrosive to copper pipe, document here.

Sealed polyethylene sleeves are suitable for cast iron and to a lesser
extent ductile iron, but may not be successful on galvanized steel
piping (commonly fails within 12 months).

-   Cathodic protection: Sacrificial anodes or impressed current.
    Incorporate a facility for periodic testing. Conform to the
    recommendations of AS 2832.1.

-   Continuous wrapping using proprietary petroleum taping material.

-   Impermeable flexible plastic coating.

-   Sealed polyethylene sleeve.

Aggressive soils: If metallic piping or components are installed in
chemically aggressive soil, provide additional protection as follows:

-   Material: Continuous polyethylene sleeve to ASTM D1248 with a
    minimum thickness of 0.25 mm.

-   Installation: Wrap or sleeve pipes and components. Tape joints
    between sections of polyethylene and between polyethylene and
    piping.

#### Repairs to finishes {#repairs-to-finishes .unnumbered}

Requirement: Repair damaged finishes to restore their corrosion
protection, appearance and service life.

Painting of pipe threads: After pipe installation and before other
finishes or insulation are applied, paint exposed threads in
metallic-coated steel pipe with zinc rich paint.

### Marking and labelling

Specify marking systems, detailing what is to be marked and how.

Adjust the lettering sizes, hierarchy, and colours to suit the project.

#### General {#general-23 .unnumbered}

Requirement: Mark and label services and equipment for identification
purposes as follows:

-   Locations exposed to weather: Provide durable materials.

-   Pipes, conduits and ducts: To AS 1345 throughout its length,
    including in concealed spaces.

-   Cables: Label to indicate the origin and destination of the cable.

Consistency: Label and mark equipment using a consistent scheme across
all services elements of the project.

Asset management labels and tags:  

Specify type, e.g. Barcode, QR code, Radio Frequency Identification
(RFID), and form, e.g. labels, tags, and data format for RFID.

#### Label samples and schedules {#label-samples-and-schedules .unnumbered}

Requirement: For each item or type of item, prepare a schedule of
marking and labelling, including the following:

-   A description of the item or type of item for identification.

-   The proposed text for marking or labelling.

-   The proposed location of the marking and labelling.

Submission timing: Before marking or labelling.

#### Electrical accessories {#electrical-accessories .unnumbered}

Circuit identification: Label isolating switches and outlets to identify
circuit origin.

#### Operable devices {#operable-devices .unnumbered}

Requirement: Mark to identify the following:

-   Controls.

-   Indicators, gauges, meters.

-   Isolating switches.

#### Equipment concealed in ceilings {#equipment-concealed-in-ceilings .unnumbered}

This text is appropriate for large or complex projects. May be deleted
for simple projects.

Location: Provide a label on the ceiling, to indicate the location of
each concealed item requiring access for routine inspection, maintenance
and/or operation and as follows:

-   Tiled ceilings, locate the label on the ceiling grid closest to the
    concealed item access point.

-   Flush lined ceilings, locate adjacent to closest access panel.

Concealed equipment: Items to be labelled include the following:

-   Fan coil units and terminal equipment (e.g. VAV terminals).

-   Fire and smoke dampers.

-   Isolating valves not directly connected to items otherwise labelled.

-   Motorised dampers.

#### Wall mounted equipment in occupied areas {#wall-mounted-equipment-in-occupied-areas .unnumbered}

Location: Provide labels on wall mounted items in occupied areas
including the following:

-   Services control switches.

-   Temperature and humidity sensors.

#### Points lists {#points-lists .unnumbered}

Automatic control points: Provide plasticised, fade-free points lists
for each automatic control panel and include terminal numbers, point
addresses, short and long descriptors in the lists. Store in a pocket on
the door of the panel.

#### Pressure vessels {#pressure-vessels .unnumbered}

General: Mount manufacturer's certificates in glazed frames on a wall
next to the vessel.

#### Valves and pumps {#valves-and-pumps .unnumbered}

General: Label to associate pumps with their starters and valves. Screw
fix labels to body or attach label to valve handwheels with a key ring.

#### Underground services {#underground-services .unnumbered}

This text is appropriate for large or complex projects. May be deleted
for simple projects.

Survey: Accurately record the routes of underground cables and pipes
before backfilling. Include on the record drawings.

Records: Provide digital photographic records of underground cable and
pipe routes before backfilling. Include in operation and maintenance
manual.

Location marking: Accurately mark the location of underground cables and
pipes with route markers consisting of a marker plate set flush in a
concrete base, engraved to show the direction of the line and the name
of the service.

Markers: Place markers at ground level at each joint, route junction,
change of direction, termination and building entry point and in
straight runs at intervals of not more than 100 m.

Marker bases: 200 mm diameter x 200 mm deep, minimum concrete.

Direction marking: Show the direction of the cable and pipe run by means
of direction arrows on the marker plate. Indicate distance to the next
marker.

Plates: Brass, aluminium or stainless steel with black filled engraved
lettering, minimum size 75 x 75 x 1 mm thick.

Plate fixing: Waterproof adhesive and 4 brass or stainless steel
countersunk screws.

Marker height: Set the marker plate flush with paved surfaces, and 25 mm
above other surfaces.

Marker tape: Where electric bricks or covers are not provided over
underground wiring, provide a 150 mm wide yellow or orange marker tape
bearing the words WARNING -- electric cable buried below, laid in the
trench 150 mm below ground level.

Plastic pipe: Provide a detectable marker tape with trace wire to
identify the route of buried piping. Terminate with 1000 mm coil in a
readily accessible location. Tag to match the record drawings.

#### Labels and notices {#labels-and-notices .unnumbered}

Materials: Select from the following:

-   Cast metal.

-   For indoor applications only, engraved two-colour laminated plastic.

-   Proprietary pre-printed self-adhesive flexible plastic labels with
    machine printed black lettering.

-   Stainless steel or brass minimum 1 mm thick with black filled
    engraved lettering.

Emergency functions: To AS 1319.

Colours: Generally to AS 1345 as appropriate, otherwise black lettering
on white background except as follows:

-   Danger, warning labels: White lettering on red background.

-   Main switch and caution labels: Red lettering on white background.

Edges: If labels exceed 1.5 mm thickness, radius or bevel the edges.

Labelling text and marking: To correspond to terminology and identifying
number of the respective item as shown on the record drawings and
documents and in operating and maintenance manuals.

Lettering heights:

-   Danger, warning and caution notices: Minimum 10 mm for main heading,
    minimum 5 mm for remainder.

-   Equipment labels within cabinets: Minimum 5 mm.

-   Equipment nameplates: Minimum 40 mm.

-   Identifying labels on outside of cabinets: Minimum 5 mm.

-   Isolating switches: Minimum 5 mm.

-   Switchboards, main assembly designation: Minimum 25 mm.

-   Switchboards, outgoing functional units: Minimum 10 mm.

-   Switchboards, sub assembly designations: Minimum 15 mm.

-   Valves:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   ≥ DN65: Minimum 25 mm.

-   \< DN65: Minimum 10 mm.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Self-adhesive flexible plastic labels:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Labels less than 2000 mm above floor: 5 mm.

-   Labels minimum 2000 mm above floor: 10 mm.

-   Other locations: Minimum 5 mm.

Label locations: Locate labels so they are easily seen and are either
attached to, below or next to the item being marked.

Fixing: Fix labels securely using screws, rivets, proprietary
self-adhesive labels or double-sided adhesive tape and as follows:

-   If labels are mounted in extruded aluminium sections, use rivets or
    countersunk screws to fix the extrusions.

-   Use aluminium or monel rivets for aluminium labels.

Vapour barriers: Do not penetrate vapour barriers.

## Completion

### Tools and spare parts

#### Spare parts {#spare-parts .unnumbered}

General: Provide spare parts listed as documented.

Consider the location for secure and safe permanent storage for the
tools and spare parts supplied. If left in the plant room they may be
used during the maintenance period.

Replacement: Replace spare parts used during the maintenance period.

#### Tools and spare parts schedule {#tools-and-spare-parts-schedule .unnumbered}

Submission timing: At least 8 weeks before the date for practical
completion.

Requirement: Prepare a schedule of tools, portable instruments and spare
parts necessary for maintenance of the installation. For each item state
the recommended quantity and the manufacturer's current price. Include
the following in the prices:

-   Checking receipt, marking and numbering in conformance with the
    spare parts schedule.

-   Packaging and delivery to site.

-   Painting, greasing and packing to prevent deterioration during
    storage.

-   Referencing equipment schedules in the operation and maintenance
    manuals.

-   Suitable means of identifying, storing and securing the tools and
    instruments. Include instructions for use.

### Training

#### General {#general-24 .unnumbered}

Standard: To SA TS 5342.

See in particular SA TS 5342 clause 2.8.

Duration: Instruction to be available for the whole of the commissioning
and running-in periods.

Format: Conduct training at agreed times, at system or equipment
location. Also provide seminar instruction to cover all major
components.

Operation and maintenance manuals: Use items and procedures listed in
the final draft operation and maintenance manuals as the basis for
instruction. Review contents in detail with the principal's staff.

For larger or more complex projects detail the training requirements. A
schedule may be appropriate. Typical inclusions are:

-   Chiller sets.

-   BMS/DDC controls.

-   Cooling towers.

-   Boilers.

-   Fire mode operation.

Certification: Provide written certification of attendance and
participation in training for each attendee. Provide register of
certificates issued.

#### Demonstrators {#demonstrators .unnumbered}

General: Use only qualified manufacturer's representatives who are
knowledgeable about the installations.

#### Operation {#operation .unnumbered}

General: Explain and demonstrate to the principal's staff the purpose,
function and operation of the installations.

List the training requirements for the project. Delete if none required.
A schedule may be appropriate.

#### Maintenance {#maintenance .unnumbered}

General: Explain and demonstrate to the principal's staff the purpose,
function and maintenance of the installations.

List the training requirements for the project. Delete if none required.
A schedule may be appropriate.

#### Seasonal operation {#seasonal-operation .unnumbered}

General: For equipment requiring seasonal operation, demonstrate during
the appropriate season.

#### Video recording {#video-recording .Optional-Heading-4 .unnumbered}

Requirement: Video-record all training sessions. Catalogue and include
recordings with the operation and maintenance manuals.

If applicable consider including this Optional style text by changing to
Normal style text.

### Cleaning

#### Final cleaning {#final-cleaning .unnumbered}

General: Before the date for practical completion, clean throughout,
including all exterior and interior surfaces except those totally and
permanently concealed from view.

Labels: Remove all visible labels not required for maintenance.

#### Removal of material {#removal-of-material .unnumbered}

General: Dispose of building waste material off site to the requirements
of the relevant authorities.

### Warranties

#### General {#general-25 .unnumbered}

The form(s) of warranty required should be provided as part of the
contract documentation. Reference in the technical worksections should
include the following:

-   Minimum period.

-   Form of warranty.

Requirement: If a warranty is documented, name the principal as
warrantee. Register with manufacturers as necessary. Retain copies
delivered with components and equipment.

Check that the principal/proprietor is to be the warrantee - vary
accordingly. The principal/proprietor may not be the owner or end user
in every case, for example.

Approval of installer: If installation is not by manufacturer, and
product warranty is conditional on the manufacturer's approval of the
installer, submit the manufacturer's written approval of the installing
firm.

If the manufacturer and installer offer separate warranties make sure
that they are interlocking and are nominated as such in the respective
technical worksection. Refer to NATSPEC TECHnote PRO 003 for information
on specifying warranties for steel protective paint coatings.

Principal\'s responsibilities: Submit details of responsibilities of the
principal required to keep warranties in force.

## Testing and commissioning

### Testing - generally

See NATSPEC TECHnote GEN 014 on the specification tests by the
contractor which may be required during the construction process.

#### Inspection and testing plan {#inspection-and-testing-plan .unnumbered}

Requirement: Provide inspection and testing plan consistent with the
construction program including details of test stages and procedures.

#### Notice {#notice-1 .unnumbered}

Site tests: Give notice of the time and place of documented tests.

Inspection: Give sufficient notice for inspection to be made of the
commissioning, testing and verification tests on completion of
commissioning.

#### Attendance {#attendance-1 .unnumbered}

General: Provide attendance at tests.

Suppliers: If necessary to carry out documented tests, arrange equipment
suppliers to assist.

#### Testing authorities {#testing-authorities .unnumbered}

Requirement: Have tests carried out by an Accredited Testing Laboratory,
accredited for the documented test method, except for site tests or test
methods that do not have an accredited testing laboratory.

#### Test equipment {#test-equipment .unnumbered}

Accuracy: Use testing equipment designed to test and/or measure system
performance within the documented tolerances.

Calibration: Use only instruments that have current calibration
certificates issued by an Accredited Testing Laboratory. Tag or label
instruments with calibration date and calibration authority name.
Provide copies of certification if requested.

Maximum period since last calibration: As recommended by the
manufacturer but less than 12 months, except as documented.

The accuracy and reliability of instrumentation and measurement methods
is crucial to testing and commissioning. It is essential that a
recognised independent authority has recently calibrated instruments.

Recalibration: If dropped or damaged, recalibrate instruments.

Testing equipment: Provide test equipment and tools to perform
documented tests as follows:

-   Special testing equipment: If documented, provide special equipment,
    tools and instruments required for testing or calibration.

These would typically be items only available from vendor, specific to a
piece of equipment.

-   Other testing equipment: Provide standard testing equipment.

#### Testing procedures {#testing-procedures .unnumbered}

Verification: Verify test procedures by:

-   Manual testing.

-   Monitoring performance and analysing results using the control
    system trend logs.

-   A combination of the above methods.

Sampling: Sampling may be used subject to the following:

-   Use a sampling strategy only for multiple identical pieces of
    non-life-safety or otherwise non-critical equipment.

-   If at any point, more than one identical item has failed, stop
    testing, determine the cause, rectify and document changes made to
    remaining units, before continuing with functional testing of the
    remaining units.

#### Type tests {#type-tests .unnumbered}

Type test reports: Required, as evidence of conformance of proprietary
equipment.

#### Sound pressure level measurements {#sound-pressure-level-measurements .unnumbered}

Requirement: Conform to the following:

-   Correction for background noise: To AS/NZS 2107 Table B1.

-   External: To AS 1055.

-   Internal: To AS/NZS 2107.

-   Measurement positions: If a test position is designated only by
    reference to a room or space, do not take measurements less than 1 m
    from the floor, ground or walls. For large equipment items including
    chillers, measure at 2 m and 7 m from the equipment item.

Consider specifying specific locations. AS/NZS 2107 clause 6.1.3 says
measurements should be taken at the expected occupancy position(s) in
the space.

-   Sound pressure level analysis: Measure the sound pressure level and
    the background sound pressure level over the full range of octave
    band centre frequencies from 31.5 Hz to 8 kHz at the designated
    positions.

-   Sound pressure levels: Measure the A-weighted sound pressure levels
    and the A-weighted background sound pressure levels at the
    designated positions.

#### Test outcome {#test-outcome .unnumbered}

Requirement: Test as documented and achieve the following:

-   Pass the documented Pass/Fail test, and/or

-   Values that meet documented requirements, and/or

-   Verification of manufacturer\'s claimed performance.

#### Failure of multiple items {#failure-of-multiple-items .unnumbered}

Requirement: If 10% or 3, whichever is greater, of identical pieces
(size does not constitute a difference) of equipment fail to perform as
documented for any reason, treat all identical units as having failed.
Submit notice of failure and conform to the following:

-   Within one week of notification, examine all other identical units
    and record the results. Submit a report of the findings within two
    weeks of the original failure notice.

-   Within two weeks of the original failure notification, submit a
    signed and dated explanation of the problem, including the cause of
    failure, the proposed solution, full equipment details and any other
    information. Do not exceed the documented requirements of the
    original installation with the proposed solution.

#### Rectification of failure under test {#rectification-of-failure-under-test .unnumbered}

Requirement: If an item fails a documented test, rectify the cause of
failure and repeat the test.

Submissions: If submission of test results is documented, submit results
of both successful and unsuccessful tests.

#### Test reports {#test-reports .unnumbered}

Requirement: Include the following:

-   Documented performance criteria including, if documented,
    tolerances.

-   Observations and results of tests and conformance or non-conformance
    with documented requirements.

Refer to NATSPEC TECHnote GEN 014 on specifying the various
contractor\'s submissions and tests that may be required during the
construction process.

#### Test validity period {#test-validity-period .unnumbered}

Requirement: As documented or, if no validity period is documented, no
older than 5 years.

Some worksections and referenced standards nominate a maximum validity
period which may be greater or less than 5 years.

#### Controls {#controls .unnumbered}

General: Calibrate, set and adjust control instruments, control systems
and safety controls.

#### Circuit protection {#circuit-protection .unnumbered}

General: Confirm that circuit protective devices are sized and adjusted
to protect installed circuits.

#### Certification {#certification .unnumbered}

General: On satisfactory completion of the installation, testing and
commissioning and before the date for practical completion, certify that
each installation is operating correctly.

#### Integrated system tests {#integrated-system-tests .unnumbered}

Requirement: Conduct integrated system tests as documented.

These may be documented in the [**Error! Hyperlink reference not
valid.**]() with details of the tests in the respective worksections
relating to the tests.

Tests: Provide the following:

-   Test the integrated operation of the systems listed in each mode
    documented.

-   Restoration of the systems to their pre-test condition on completion
    of the tests above.

Failure: If any of the systems fails to perform as documented, including
return to normal operation, rectify the cause and repeat the integrated
system test.

#### Deferred and seasonal tests {#deferred-and-seasonal-tests .unnumbered}

Deferred tests: If documented testing cannot be completed at the
scheduled or documented time, the Superintendent may direct that they be
deferred to a later time but as soon as possible after the scheduled or
documented time.

Seasonal tests: If documented tests are dependent on specific weather
conditions, they may be deferred to a time when weather conditions are
close to the documented test conditions. Complete seasonal testing as
soon as possible but no later than one month before the end of the
defects liability period.

#### Functional tests {#functional-tests .unnumbered}

Function: Carry out functional and operational tests on each energised
equipment item and circuit.

### Building sealing testing {#building-sealing-testing .Optional-Heading-3}

If applicable consider including this *Optional* style text by changing
to *Normal* style text

This is to test the quality of Deemed-to-Satisfy building sealing not as
a verification method to BCA JV4. If used as a verification method it
will need to be edited, as may sealing methods specified elsewhere in
NATSPEC.

In addition to testing the sealing of the building envelope this test
may be of value in testing the sealing of spaces within the building,
for example spaces that must be held at positive or negative pressure
relative to surrounding spaces.

#### Building sealing test {#building-sealing-test .Optional-Heading-4 .unnumbered}

Requirement: If documented, provide a building sealing test by an
Accredited Testing Laboratory.

This requirement may be documented in SELECTIONS**, [Error! Hyperlink
reference not valid.](). [Error! Hyperlink reference not valid.]()**.

Standard: To AS/NZS ISO 9972.

Timing:  

Detail when the test is to be carried out. This will depend on the
purpose of the test. For a test on the quality of the contractors
methods it should be as early as possible so that adjustments can be
made to the methods, if necessary. If on positive or negative pressure
spaces testing should be on completion of sealing but before any work
that may require rectification is further enclosed, for example by the
installation of a false ceiling.

Maximum leakage rate m³/(hr.m²) at 50 Pa reference pressure:  

This is the maximum leakage rate for the space to be tested expressed as
volume of air leaked per hour per unit envelope area. AS/NZS ISO 9972
uses m³/(hr.m²) whereas BCA JV4 ambiguously uses m³/hr.m² for the same
quantity.

Extent of test:    

AS/NZS ISO 9972 may be used to test all or part of a building. Insert
the amount of the building to be tested. If used to verify the quality
of sealing envelope methods the test should cover a representative part
of the building, such as a complete floor.

### Commissioning

Almost all projects require some commissioning, particularly of building
services. This clause covers common requirements and references
SA TS 5342. Specific commissioning requirements are contained in the
**COMMISSIONING** clauses of the respective worksections.

If the principal engages a commissioning manager, also include *0164
Commissioning*.

See NATSPEC TECHnote GEN 020 on commissioning.

Compliance with this clause targets the Commissioning requirement within
the Minimum Expectation level of the Verification and Handover credit in
Green Star Buildings.

#### Standard {#standard-1 .unnumbered}

Requirement: Conform to SA TS 5342.

#### Static completion {#static-completion .unnumbered}

Requirement: Systems, components and building elements are statically
compete when:

-   Their construction and installation is compete and as documented,
    including completion of all systems, components and building
    elements on which they are dependent for commissioning.

For example, air handling systems are not statically complete if the
spaces served have windows missing or if doors required to be closed for
commissioning are held open.

-   All pre-commissioning tests have been successfully completed.

-   They are safe and ready for commissioning.

-   All cleaning that may adversely affect commissioning is complete.

-   They have been inspected and all outstanding remedial work that may
    adversely affect commissioning is complete.

This permits commissioning to proceed if minor work such as painting and
labelling is not complete.

-   All spaces required for access for commissioning are safe to use and
    cleared of obstructions that may adversely affect commissioning.

#### Commissioning plan {#commissioning-plan .unnumbered}

Requirement: Provide a commissioning plan to SA TS 5342 including the
following:

-   A summary of the work covered by the commissioning plan.

-   The parties responsible for this work and any commissioning
    interrelationships.

SA TS 5342 Appendix B contains a suggested framework for this. If there
is no commissioning manager, the commissioning manager\'s roles and
responsibilities would normally fall to the contractor.

If *0164 Commissioning* is used the principal must provide a SA TS 5342
roles and responsibilities matrix which would form the basis of the
contractor\'s submission above.

-   The basis of the design.

This will normally be based on information provided by the design team.

-   General sequence of commissioning.

-   Project specific commissioning methodologies for each system and
    building element to be commissioned.

-   Pre-commissioning requirements.

-   Project specific commissioning procedures for each commissioning
    activity including integrated system tests, deferred and seasonal
    tests

-   A project specific building tuning plan for all commissioned
    systems. Include building tuning procedures and tuning team members.

-   Requirements for witnessing of tests and documented demonstrations
    of completion of commissioning.

-   Commissioning program to [**COMMISSIONING**](#commissioning),
    [**Commissioning program**](#commissioning-program).

#### Commissioning program {#commissioning-program .unnumbered}

Submissions: Submit a program consistent with, and forming part of, the
construction program as follows:

-   Set out the proposed program for completion, commissioning, testing
    and instruction.

Review and sign-off may involve external bodies such as Network Utility
Operator and fire authorities.

-   Identify related works and timing of the works prerequisite to
    successful and timely completion of the works.

Failure to adequately program commissioning and related works, and
conform to the program, is a common but avoidable cause of occupant
complaints, excessive energy consumption and unsafe systems. An adequate
program is a crucial step in the commissioning process.

The commissioning program should make sure that adequate time is allowed
in the overall building program for commissioning and that the
requirements for commissioning are complete before commissioning is
commenced.

Common problem areas include incomplete building works such as missing
ceiling tiles, doors not hung and the building not being airtight. The
results of not properly programming commissioning are that either it is
done in too little time or it is done after the building has been handed
over when it often leads to complaints. In both situations the result is
normally poor commissioning.

The design team should be involved in developing the program so that
commissioning reflects their design intent.

Revisions: Submit revisions of the program as the project proceeds.

Plant operating period: Include time in the program for the documented
plant operating period before the date for practical completion.

Alternatively, specify, in adequate detail, any minimum plant operating
periods required for specific systems/equipment.

#### Commissioning activities {#commissioning-activities .unnumbered}

Requirement: Provide the following to SA TS 5342:

This will require input from specialist subcontractors. The
commissioning program will normally be a subset of the project program.
Reviews are necessary for example to identify where the commissioning
methodologies of one subcontractor impact on other trade subcontractors
or the overall program.

If using *0164 Commissioning*, some items below may need modification,
for example, if an independent commissioning manager is to prepare the
commissioning plan based on the contractor\'s input rather than the
contractor preparing the commissioning plan.

-   Manage the commissioning process.

-   Establish and manage the completion process.

-   Review design documents for commissionability. Submit a report
    including any recommended changes.

-   Review documented commissioning requirements. Submit a report
    including any recommended changes.

-   Review construction documents for commissionability. Submit a report
    including any recommended changes.

-   Develop, review and update the commissioning plan and commissioning
    program.

-   Develop, review and update commissioning methodologies.

-   Develop, review and update commissioning procedures.

-   Report on interdependencies between trades that may affect
    commissioning.

For example, external doors and windows must be complete and closed in
order to air balance systems effectively.

-   Develop, review and update procedures for initial start-up of
    systems.

-   Develop, review and update integrated system test procedures.

-   Carry out pre-commissioning activities. Record results and submit
    pre-commissioning records.

-   Conduct commissioning activities to the commissioning mythologies
    and procedures. Record and submit commissioning records.

-   Facilitate and conduct integrated system tests and demonstrations.
    Record and submit integrated system test records.

-   Conduct documented demonstrations of completion of commissioning.

 Referred to as witness tests in SA TS 5342.

-   Report on the progress of commissioning work.

-   Report on conformance to the commissioning plan and program.

-   Report on commissioning defects and issues and progress on their
    resolution.

Consider specifying the frequency of progress reports.

-   Develop, review and update commissioning report.

-   Develop, review and update training materials, conduct training
    sessions to [**TRAINING**](#training).

-   Develop, review and update operation and maintenance manuals to
    **OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE MANUALS.**

-   Manage and report deferred and seasonal testing activities to
    [**TESTING - GENERALLY**](#testing---generally).

-   Management and reporting of building tuning process.

-   Periodically review performance data.

#### Verification of commissioning {#verification-of-commissioning .unnumbered}

Requirement: On completion of commissioning of the equipment or system,
provide additional tests to verify that it is fully commissioned and
operating to documented requirements.

These are referred to as witness tests in SA TS 5342.

### Building tuning

Procedures for building tuning are documented in [**Error! Hyperlink
reference not valid.**](). The contractor is to provide initial building
tuning during the maintenance period but ongoing building tuning should
continue after the end of the maintenance period as recommended by
SA TS 5342.

Compliance with this clause targets the Tuning requirement within the
Minimum Expectation level of the Verification and Handover credit in
Green Star Buildings.

#### General {#general-26 .unnumbered}

Standard: To SA TS 5342.

Frequency: Three monthly or more frequently.

Duration: Until the end of the maintenance period. Provide last building
tuning in the month before the end of the maintenance period.

Requirement: Provide the following:

-   Review data from all recording systems against documented
    requirements.

-   Review of building occupant feedback.

-   If discrepancies are identified from the above, take corrective
    action to rectify them.

-   Report on the findings of the reviews, corrective action and effect
    of corrective action.

-   Recommend other action to improve the effectiveness, reliability and
    efficiency of systems.

## Project records

### Tactical fire drawings

The requirement for a fire control room or centre is set out in
BCA E1.8. If the project includes a fire control room it must contain
colour-coded, durable, tactical fire plans to BCA Spec E1.8.

#### General {#general-27 .unnumbered}

Requirement: Provide sets of colour coded tactical fire drawings,
showing all items and systems relevant in a fire to BCA Spec E1.8.

Scale: 1:200 or larger if required to be easily read under emergency
conditions.

Coordination: Agree the format, colour coding and contents of the
tactical fire plans with the Local Fire Authority before beginning
documentation.

Location: Provide one set of the laminated drawings fixed to the wall or
supplied in a vertical plan hanger in the fire control room.

Loose set: Provide a second set of identical drawings.

Operation and maintenance manuals: Provide a set of colour coded
tactical fire drawings in each copy of the operating and maintenance
manual.

#### Inclusions {#inclusions .unnumbered}

Requirement: Include the following on the tactical fire drawings:

-   Legend sheet at front of set.

-   Colour coding key.

-   Building: As follows:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Floor plans.

-   Pressurised and non-pressurised fire isolated stairs and passages.

-   Smoke and fire compartments.

-   Special risk areas.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Fire services: As follows:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Automatic fire detection systems.

-   Automatic suppression systems including gas flooding systems.

-   Communications including warden intercommunication points.

-   Fire control room.

-   Fire equipment including booster connections.

-   Fire hydrants, hose reels, portable fire extinguishers.

-   Fire detection control and indicating equipment (FDCIE).

-   Fire service lifts.

-   Fire telephone and control panel.

-   Hydrant and sprinkler pumps.

-   Hydrant/hose reels.

-   Sprinkler and hydrant, suction and booster connections.

-   Sprinkler control valves.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Electrical services: As follows:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Emergency power supplies.

-   Essential services switchboards.

-   Evacuation warning panel.

-   Standby power plant.

-   Substations/transformers.

-   Switchboards, main switch room.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Mechanical ventilation and air handling equipment: As follows:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Air intakes, fans, ducts, shafts.

-   Conditioners and mixing boxes.

-   Fire dampers.

-   General exhaust air fans, ducts, shafts, discharges.

-   Smoke dampers.

-   Smoke fans including exhaust fans, zone and stair pressurisation
    fans.

-   Stair pressurisation systems.

-   Supply air system.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Mechanical ventilation and air handling equipment operation: As
    follows:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Statement of normal condition.

-   Condition upon fire alarm.

-   Manual controls available.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Hydraulic services: As follows:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Gas meters.

-   Gas supply control.

-   Incoming water supplies and valves for the sprinkler, hydrant and
    fire hose reel systems.

-   Water tank.

### Record drawings

Record drawings is defined in [**Error! Hyperlink reference not
valid.**](). NATSPEC technical worksections provide for documentation of
particular requirements. Prepare a schedule of required submissions, for
your own use, identifying in particular those things to be done before
both practical completion and completion e.g. training, commissioning
and submission of manuals and warranties.

#### General {#general-28 .unnumbered}

Requirement: Prepare record drawings showing the following:

-   Installed locations of building elements, services, plant and
    equipment.

-   Off-the-grid dimensions and depth if applicable.

-   Any provisions for the future.

#### Recording, format and submission {#recording-format-and-submission .unnumbered}

Requirement: Record changes made during the progress of the works on a
set of drawings kept on site for that specific purpose.

Drawing layout: Use the same borders and title block as the contract
drawings.

Quantity and format: Conform to [**SUBMISSIONS**](#submissions).

Endorsement: Sign and date all record drawings.

Consider signing a set of hard copy drawings or a record list of these
drawings.

Accuracy: If errors in, or omissions from, the record drawings are
found, amend the drawings and re-issue in the quantity and format
documented for [**SUBMISSIONS**](#submissions).

Date for submission: Not later than 2 weeks after the date for practical
completion.

Changes made after the date for practical completion will require a
re-issue of the drawings in conformance with the preceding requirements.
See also [**Error! Hyperlink reference not valid.**]().

#### Services record drawings {#services-record-drawings .unnumbered}

General: To [**RECORD DRAWINGS**](#record-drawings),
[**General**](#general-28) and [**Recording, format and
submission**](#recording-format-and-submission) and the following:

-   Extensions and/or changes to existing: If a drawing shows extensions
    and/or alterations to existing installations, include sufficient of
    the existing installation to make the drawing comprehensible without
    reference to drawings of the original installation.

-   Detention: If on-site detention tanks or pondage are provided,
    include the volume required on the drawing and the permitted flow
    rate to the connected system.

-   Domestic cold water or fire mains: Show the pressure available at
    the initial connection point and the pressure available at the most
    disadvantaged location on each major section of the works.

-   Stormwater: If storm water pipes are shown, include the pipe size
    and pipe grade together with the maximum acceptable flow and the
    actual design flow.

Record drawings are required as part of the operation and maintenance
manuals. Amend the list of inclusions to suit the project but record
drawings would normally be the shop drawings suitably amended.

Diagrams: Provide diagrammatic drawings of each system including the
following:

-   Controls.

-   Piping including all valves and valve identification tags.

-   Principal items of equipment.

-   Single line wiring diagrams.

-   Acoustic and thermal insulation.

-   Access provisions and space allowances.

-   Fasteners.

-   Fixtures.

-   Switchgear and control gear assembly circuit schedules including
    electrical service characteristics, controls and communications.

-   Charts of valve tag numbers, with location and function of each
    valve, keyed to flow and control diagrams.

CAD base drawings: .dwg and .ifc

If CAD drawings or BIM files are to be provided to the main contractor
for use in the preparation of record drawings, advise the conditions
that will apply, including charges, restrictions on the use and
disclaimers. The provision of CAD files to third parties is a
contractual issue between the consultant and the client and should be
addressed in the Client/Consultant agreements.

Subsurface services: Record information on underground or submerged
services to the documented quality level, conforming to AS 5488.1.

Subsurface services recording quality level: A

AS 5488.1 defines four quality levels for recording subsurface utilities
information, from A to D. Each quality level requires a different level
of accuracy for the recorded information.

### Operation and maintenance manuals

NATSPEC technical worksections provide for documentation of particular
requirements.

This clause addresses both building and services components. Consider
Work Health and Safety (WHS) concerns, and that manuals are able to be
used by unions, to address WHS issues.

Adequately prepared maintenance manuals should form the basis of any
self-contained maintenance contract.

It is important that the manuals contain provisions for performance
benchmarking so that any deterioration in the system over time can be
identified.

Compliance with this clause targets the Operations and Maintenance
requirement within the Minimum Expectation level of the Verification and
Handover credit in Green Star Buildings.

#### General {#general-29 .unnumbered}

Standard: To SA TS 5342.

See SA TS 5342 clause 2.9 for minimum operation and maintenance
information requirements.

Authors and compilers: Personnel experienced in the maintenance and
operation of equipment and systems installed, and with editorial
ability.

Referenced documents: If referenced documents or worksections require
submissions of manuals, include corresponding material in the operation
and maintenance manuals.

Structure of manuals:   

For large projects with many manuals, include the required structure.
e.g. a list of volumes (or sets of volumes) for each service.

Subdivision: By installation or system, depending on project size.

Revisions: Amend operation and maintenance manuals to include changes
made to the installation during the work.

#### Contents of manual {#contents-of-manual .unnumbered}

Table of contents: Include a table of contents in each volume. Title to
match cover.

Table of amendments: Include a table of amendments.

Directory: Include names, addresses, email addresses and telephone and
facsimile numbers of principal consultant, subconsultants, contractor,
subcontractors and names of responsible parties.

Record drawings: Include complete set of record drawings, full size.

Drawings and technical data: Include as necessary for the efficient
operation and maintenance of the installation.

Installation description: Include a general description of the
installation.

Systems descriptions and performance:  Include a technical description
of the systems installed including the basis of design, the
interrelation with other systems and the building and mode of operation,
presented in a clear and concise format readily understandable by the
principal's staff. Identify function, normal operating characteristics,
safety features and limiting conditions.

Baseline data: Include the baseline data to AS 1851, including baseline
data to AS 1668.1, AS 1682.2, AS 1670.1 and AS/NZS 2293.1.

Conformance with AS 1851 is dependent on the existence of baseline data.
AS 1668.1 clause 4.15 includes baseline data for ventilation systems.
AS 1670.1 clause 1.7.2 covers baseline for fire detection systems.

Commissioning records: Include commissioning records to SA TS 5342. Link
commissioning records to item codes on the record drawings.

Fire systems and equipment: Include documentation to AS 1851, including
the schedule of essential functionality and performance requirements.

AS 1851 provides details of items to be included in the manuals, details
of records and relevant maintenance record forms.

Digital photographic records: Include records to **MARKING AND
LABELLING, [Underground services](#underground-services)**.

Equipment: Include schedules with the following details for installed
equipment:

-   Item code for use on record and diagrammatic drawings, and spare
    parts schedule.

-   Equipment name plate data including serial number, if any.

-   Name and contact details of the manufacturer and supplier.

-   Catalogue list number(s).

-   Location.

-   Function.

-   Performance figures and capacity data.

-   Date of manufacture.

-   Manufacturer's product data sheets including only relevant matter
    for the project. Mark each product data sheet to clearly identify
    specific products and component parts used in the installation, and
    data applicable to the installation.

-   Additional information and commentary to illustrate relations of
    component parts. 

Certificates:

-   Certificates from authorities.

-   Product certification.

-   Test certificates for each service installation and all equipment.

-   Warranties.

Trends: 7 day record of all trends at commissioning.

For small systems with no trend logging provisions, delete the last
item.

Operation procedures: Include for systems installed:

-   Manufacturer\'s technical literature as appropriate.

-   Safe starting up, running-in, operating and shutting down
    procedures. Include logical step-by-step instructions for each
    procedure.

-   Control sequences and flow diagrams.

-   Legend for colour-codes services.

-   Schedules of fixed and variable equipment settings established
    during commissioning and maintenance.

-   A list of special safety devices and their set points.

-   Procedures for seasonal changeovers.

-   Warnings to operators.

-   Recommendations for efficient plant operation.

-   If the installation includes cooling towers, recommendations for
    water efficiency.

-   Building tuning plan and procedure to
    [**COMMISSIONING**](#commissioning), [**Commissioning
    plan**](#commissioning-plan).

Building occupants\' guide: Include a concise guide written and
illustrated for building occupants with no technical background. Include
the following:

-   Security provisions.

-   Safety and access.

-   Environmental features, including energy and water efficiency and
    waste management.

-   Occupant relevant information on design and operation.

-   Information for occupants on environmental systems that rely
    partially or wholly on local controls for heating, lighting,
    cooling, and ventilation.

-   Contact details for faults, maintenance and emergencies.

Edit to suit the project.

Maintenance procedures:

-   Detailed recommendations for periodic maintenance and procedures,
    including schedule of maintenance work with frequency and
    manufacturers' recommended tests.

-   Manufacturer's technical literature as appropriate. Register with
    manufacturer as necessary. Retain copies delivered with equipment.

-   Safe trouble-shooting, disassembly, repair and reassembly, cleaning,
    alignment and adjustment, balancing and checking procedures. Provide
    logical step-by-step instructions for each procedure.

-   Schedule of spares, recommended to be held on site, for those items
    subject to wear or deterioration and that may involve the principal
    in extended deliveries when replacements are required. Include
    complete nomenclature and model numbers, and local sources of
    supply.

-   Schedule of normal consumable items, local sources of supply, and
    expected replacement intervals up to a running time of 40 000 hours.
    Include lubrication schedules for equipment.

-   Instructions for use of tools and testing equipment.

-   Troubleshooting procedures.

-   Emergency procedures, including telephone numbers for emergency
    services, and procedures for fault finding.

-   Safety data sheets (SDS).

-   Instructions and schedules conforming to AS 1851, AS/NZS 3666.2,
    AS/NZS 3666.3 and AS/NZS 3666.4.

Delete AS/NZS 3666.3 and AS/NZS 3666.4 if not applicable.

Maintenance records:

-   Prototype routine service records conforming to AS 1851 prepared to
    include project specific details.

-   Prototype periodic maintenance records and report to AS/NZS 3666.2,
    AS/NZS 3666.3 and AS/NZS 3666.4 as appropriate, prepared to include
    project specific details.

-   Hard copies: Binders to match the manuals, containing loose leaf log
    book pages designed for recording completion activities including
    operational and maintenance procedures, materials used, test
    results, comments for future maintenance actions and notes covering
    the condition of the installation. Include completed log book pages
    recording the operational and maintenance activities performed up to
    the date for practical completion.

-   Number of pages: The greater of 100 pages or enough pages for the
    maintenance period and a further 12 months.

See AS 1851 and AIRAH DA19 for samples of prototype periodic maintenance
records.

Delete AS/NZS 3666.3 and AS/NZS 3666.4 if not applicable.

AS 1851 refers to tables that set out a checklist and frequency of
inspections some of which fall within the defects liability period. Some
states impose additional requirements.

Emergency information: For each type of emergency, including fire,
flood, gas leak, water leak, power failure, water failure, system or sub
system failure, chemical release or spill, include the following:

-   Emergency instructions.

-   Emergency procedures including:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-    Instructions for stopping or isolating.

-   Shutdown procedures and sequences.

-   Instructions for actions outside the property.

-   Special operating instructions relevant to the emergency.

-   Contact details relevant to the emergency.

#### Emergency information manual {#emergency-information-manual .unnumbered}

Form of emergency information: Provide one of the following:

-   An index and coloured tabs identifying emergency information for
    each type of emergency within the Operation and maintenance manual.

-   A separate Emergency manual containing copies of emergency
    information from the main Operation and maintenance manual.

#### Format -- electronic copies {#format-electronic-copies .unnumbered}

Scope: Provide the same material as documented for hardcopy in
electronic format.

Delivery method:  

Include the required delivery method for electronic versions e.g.
Principal\'s maintenance software.

Quantity and format: Conform to **[SUBMISSIONS](#submissions),
[Electronic submissions](#electronic-submissions)**.

Printing: Except for drawings required in [**RECORD
DRAWINGS**](#record-drawings) provide material that can be legibly
printed on A4 size paper.

#### Format -- hard copies {#format-hard-copies .unnumbered}

General: A4 size loose leaf, in commercial quality, 4 ring binders with
hard covers, each indexed, divided and titled. Include the following
features:

-   Cover: Identify each binder with typed or printed title *OPERATION
    AND MAINTENANCE MANUAL*, to spine. Identify title of project, volume
    number, volume subject matter, and date of issue.

-   Dividers: Durable divider for each separate element, with typed
    description of system and major equipment components. Clearly print
    short titles under laminated plastic tabs.

-   Drawings: Fold drawings to A4 size with title visible, insert in
    plastic sleeves (one per drawing) and accommodate them in the
    binders.

-   Pagination: Number pages.

-   Ring size: 50 mm maximum, with compressor bars.

-   Text: Manufacturers' printed data, including associated diagrams, or
    typewritten, single-sided on bond paper, in clear concise English.

Number of copies: 3.

#### Date for submission {#date-for-submission .unnumbered}

Draft submission: The earlier of the following:

-   4 weeks before the date for practical completion.

Adjust timing to suit project duration.

-   Commencement of training.

Amend if training for services maintenance not required.

Final submission: Within 2 weeks after practical completion.

### Electronic facility and asset management information {#electronic-facility-and-asset-management-information .Optional-Heading-3}

This describes electronic facility and asset management information to
be provided in addition to electronic record drawings, digital models or
operation and maintenance manuals described previously. Effective
delivery of this information requires planning and consideration of
contractual arrangements as part of the briefing process for the
project.

#### Data {#data .unnumbered}

Facility and asset data: details of equipment, installers, commissioning
and operational data.

Describe the required information to be submitted, e.g. details of
equipment, installers, commissioning and operational data.

Data exchange schema: Construction Operations Building Information
Exchange (COBie).

e.g. Construction Operations Building Information Exchange (COBie).

Software compatibility requirements:  

If known, specify the proprietary software the data has to be compatible
with. Types of software include those for Computer Aided Facility
Management (CAFM), Building Management Systems (BMS) and Building Energy
Management Systems (BEMS). Coordinate the requirements documented here
with those in other relevant worksections.

File format:  

e.g. .xls, .csv, xml or proprietary formats required by the nominated
software.

Timing:  

Describe the required timing for the provision of data. It needs
sufficient time to be integrated into the principal's systems and tested
before the principal can take over day to day operation.

## Maintenance

### Periodic maintenance of systems and equipment

#### General {#general-30 .unnumbered}

Requirement: Carry out periodic inspections and maintenance work as
recommended by manufacturers of supplied systems and equipment and to
statutory requirements.

Duration: From the time systems and equipment are put into service to
the end of the maintenance period.

This requires the contractor to maintain services before practical
completion as well as after.

Maintenance period: The greater of the defects liability period and the
period documented in the [**Maintenance requirements
schedule**](#maintenance-requirements-schedule).

Faults: Rectify promptly.

Emergencies: Attend emergency calls promptly.

Annual maintenance: Carry out recommended annual maintenance procedures
before the end of the maintenance period.

#### Maintenance program {#maintenance-program .unnumbered}

General: Submit details of maintenance procedures and program, relating
to installed plant and equipment, 6 weeks before the date for practical
completion. Indicate dates of service visits. State contact telephone
numbers of service operators and describe arrangements for emergency
calls.

#### Maintenance records {#maintenance-records .unnumbered}

General: Record in binders provided with the operation and maintenance
manuals.

Referenced documents: If referenced documents or technical worksections
require that log books or records be submitted, include this material in
the maintenance records.

Certificates: Include test and approval certificates.

Service visits: Record comments on the functioning of the systems, work
carried out, items requiring corrective action, adjustments made and
name of service operator. On completion of the visit, obtain the
signature of the principal\'s designated representative on the record of
the work undertaken.

#### Site control {#site-control .unnumbered}

General: Report to the principal's designated representative on arriving
at and before leaving the site.

### Statutory inspections and maintenance

This clause applies to inspections and maintenance after the date for
practical completion and not to Mandatory inspections (in particular the
structure) required during construction under state or territory
planning legislation.

Once a project has been handed over at the date for practical
completion, mandatory inspections and maintenance are the responsibility
of the owner who, in practice contracts this to another organisation.
Having the contractor provide the work during the defects liability
period reduces the likelihood of conflict over divided responsibility.

#### General {#general-31 .unnumbered}

Duration: From the time systems and equipment are put into service to
the end of the maintenance period.

Requirement: Provide inspections and maintenance of safety measures
required by the following:

-   AS 1851.

-   Other statutory requirements applicable to the work.

Edit this list to suit the project. Other statutory requirements may
include state or territory regulations. Non-building work health and
safety requirements such as those for pressure vessels and flammable
liquid storage may fall within the scope of this clause.

Records: Provide mandatory records.

Certification: Certify that mandatory inspections and maintenance have
been carried out and that the respective items conform to statutory
requirements.

Annual inspection: Perform an annual inspection and maintenance
immediately before the end of the maintenance period.

This is appropriate to defects liability periods of 12 and 24 months.
Edit for other defects liability periods (e.g. 6 months).

## Selections

**Schedules** are a tool to specify properties required for products or
systems. If the principal permits documentation of the product or system
by proprietary name, some of the properties may be unnecessary and can
be deleted. Document the product or system\'s location or application
here and/or on the drawings with a matching project code. Refer to
NATSPEC TECHnote GEN 024 for guidance on using and editing schedules.

### Performance

#### Noise level schedule {#noise-level-schedule .unnumbered}

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
                    A                 B                 C
  ----------------- ----------------- ----------------- -----------------
  Upper limit of                                        
  noise caused by                                       
  services                                              

                                                        

                                                        

                                                        
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

 

The codes in the header row of the schedule designate each application
or location of the item scheduled. Edit the codes to match those in
other contract documents.

Noise level requirements will often be specified for the project as a
whole. In the absence of project specific requirements AS/NZS 2107
contains recommended design sound levels for interiors.

### Submissions and inspections

#### Notices schedule {#notices-schedule .unnumbered}

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  Item                                Minimum notice
  ----------------------------------- -----------------------------------
                                      

                                      

                                      
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

 

Item: Insert details of inspection or tests.

Minimum notice: e.g. on-site: 4 hours, off-site: 2 working days.
Increase if your office is remote from the site. Refer also to the
general conditions of contract which may prescribe required notice. e.g.
AS 4000 clause 30.4 refers to reasonable notice of tests. Reasonable may
need to be defined.

### Tests

#### Tests schedule {#tests-schedule .unnumbered}

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  Test                                Requirements
  ----------------------------------- -----------------------------------
                                      

                                      

                                      
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

 

Test: Insert name of test. e.g. Building sealing test, Fire system
test - hot smoke, Fire system test - integrated fire modes.

Requirements: Insert requirements for the test e.g. systems to be
tested, which trade is to lead and when to be done.

This is a summary of tests that involve multiple trades. Make sure the
requirements for tests are covered in the respective worksections.

### Completion

#### Warranty schedule {#warranty-schedule .unnumbered}

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  Warranty                Form                    Period
  ----------------------- ----------------------- -----------------------
                                                  

                                                  

                                                  
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

 

### Maintenance

Delete clause if not required. *0792 Mechanical maintenance*, *0891
Hydraulic maintenance*, *0991 Electrical maintenance* and *1091 Fire
services maintenance* cross reference the maintenance periods documented
in this schedule.

#### Maintenance requirements schedule {#maintenance-requirements-schedule .unnumbered}

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  Provision               Maintenance period      Requirement
                          (months)                
  ----------------------- ----------------------- -----------------------
                                                  

                                                  

                                                  
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

 

Provision: e.g. Maintenance of mechanical services.

Maintenance period (months): e.g. 12 (A period of 12 months after the
date of practical completion is common for mechanical services, to make
sure that the maintenance is provided over all operating seasons. If the
period is 6 months, for example, the systems might never operate in full
heating or cooling mode.)

Requirement: e.g. As documented, conform to *0792 Mechanical
maintenance*.

REFERENCED DOCUMENTS

**The following documents are incorporated into this worksection by
reference:**

AS 1055 2018 Acoustics - Description and measurement of environment
noise

AS/NZS 1170 Structural design actions

AS 1170.4 2007 Earthquake actions in Australia

AS/NZS 1214 2016 Hot-dip galvanized coatings on threaded fasteners (ISO
metric coarse thread series) (ISO 10684:2004, MOD)

AS 1319 1994 Safety signs for the occupational environment

AS 1345 1995 Identification of the contents of pipes, conduits and ducts

AS 1397 2021 Continuous hot-dip metallic coated steel sheet and strip -
Coatings of zinc and zinc alloyed with aluminium and magnesium

AS 1657 2018 Fixed platforms, walkways, stairways and ladders - Design,
construction and installation

AS 1668 The use of ventilation and air conditioning in buildings

AS 1668.1 2015 Fire and smoke control in buildings

AS 1670 Fire detection, warning, control and intercom systems - System
design, installation and commissioning

AS 1670.1 2018 Fire

AS/NZS 1680 Interior and workplace lighting

AS/NZS 1680.2.4 2017 Industrial tasks and processes

AS 1682 Fire, smoke and air dampers

AS 1682.2 2015 Installation

AS 1851 2012 Routine service of fire protection systems and equipment

AS 1892 Portable ladders

AS 1892.1 2018 Performance and geometric requirements

AS/NZS 2107 2016 Acoustics - Recommended design sound levels and
reverberation times for building interiors

AS/NZS 2293 Emergency lighting and exit signs for buildings

AS/NZS 2293.1 2018 System design, installation and operation

AS/NZS 2311 2017 Guide to the painting of buildings

AS/NZS 2312 Guide to the protection of structural steel against
atmospheric corrosion by the use of protective coatings

AS 2312.1 2014 Paint coatings

AS 2832 Cathodic protection of metals

AS 2832.1 2015 Pipes and cables

AS 2865 2009 Confined spaces

AS/NZS 3000 2018 Electrical installations (known as the Australian/New
Zealand Wiring Rules)

AS/NZS 3500 Plumbing and drainage

AS/NZS 3500.1 2021 Water services

AS/NZS 3500.2 2021 Sanitary plumbing and drainage

AS 3660 Termite management

AS 3660.1 2014 New building work

AS/NZS 3666 Air-handling and water systems of buildings - Microbial
control

AS/NZS 3666.1 2011 Design, installation and commissioning

AS/NZS 3666.2 2011 Operation and maintenance

AS/NZS 3666.3 2011 Performance-based maintenance of cooling water
systems

AS/NZS 3666.4 2011 Performance-based maintenance of air-handling systems
(ducts and components)

AS 3959 2018 Construction of buildings in bushfire-prone areas

AS 4072 Components for the protection of openings in fire-resistant
separating elements

AS 4072.1 2005 Service penetrations and control joints

AS 4312 2019 Atmospheric corrosivity zones in Australia

AS 4586 2013 Slip resistance classification of new pedestrian surface
materials

AS/NZS 4680 2006 Hot-dip galvanized (zinc) coatings on fabricated
ferrous articles

AS/NZS 4791 2006 Hot-dip galvanized (zinc) coatings on ferrous open
sections, applied by an in-line process

AS/NZS 4792 2006 Hot-dip galvanized (zinc) coatings on ferrous hollow
sections, applied by a continuous or a specialized process

AS 5488 Classification of subsurface utility information

AS 5488.1 2019 Subsurface utility information

AS/NZS 5601 Gas installations

AS/NZS 5601.1 2013 General installations

AS 60529 2004 Degrees of protection provided by enclosures (IP Code)

SA TS 5342 2021 Technical specification for building commissioning

NCC Schedule 3 2019 Schedule 3 Definitions

BCA Spec E1.8 2019 Services and equipment - Fire control centres

BCA G1.2 2019 Ancillary provisions - Minor structures and components -
Refrigerated chambers, strong-rooms and vaults

BS 8313 1997 Code of practice for accommodation of building services in
ducts

ASTM D1248 2016 Standard Specification for Polyethylene Plastics
Extrusion Materials for Wire and Cable

ISO 10816 Mechanical vibration - Evaluation of machine vibration by
measurements on non-rotating parts

ISO 10816-3 2009 Industrial machines with nominal power above 15 kW and
nominal speeds between 120 r/min and 15 000 r/min when measured in situ

ISO/IEC 17025 2017 General requirements for the competence of testing
and calibration laboratories

ISO 20816 Mechanical vibration - Measurement and evaluation of machine
vibration

ISO 20816-1 2016 General guidelines

**The following documents are mentioned only in the *Guidance* text:**

AS 1100 Technical drawing

AS 1100.101 1992 General principles

AS 1100.201 1992 Mechanical engineering drawing

AS 1100.301 2008 Architectural drawing

AS 1100.401 1984 Engineering survey and engineering survey design
drawing

AS/NZS 1100.501 2002 Structural engineering drawing

AS/NZS 1170 Structural design actions

AS/NZS 1170.0 2002 General principles

AS 1892 Portable ladders

AS 1892.5 2020 Selection, safe use and care

AS 2118 Automatic fire sprinkler systems

AS 2118.9 1995 Piping support and installation

AS/NZS 2312 Guide to the protection of structural steel against
atmospheric corrosion by the use of protective coatings

AS 2896 2021 Medical gas systems - Installation and testing of
non-flammable medical gas pipeline systems

AS/NZS 3500 Plumbing and drainage

AS/NZS 3500.1 2018 Water services

AS/NZS 3500.2 2018 Sanitary plumbing and drainage

AS 4000 1997 General conditions of contract

AS/NZS ISO 9972 2015 Thermal performance of buildings - Determination of
air permeability of buildings - Fan pressurization method

AS ISO/IEC 17025 2018 General requirements for the competence of testing
and calibration laboratories

SA HB 197 1999 An introductory guide to the slip resistance of
pedestrian surface materials

SA HB 198 2014 Guide to the specification and testing of slip resistance
of pedestrian surfaces

AIRAH DA02 1995 Noise control

AIRAH DA19 2019 HVAC&R maintenance

BCA 3.10.5 2019 Acceptable construction - Ancillary provisions and
additional construction requirements - Construction in bushfire prone
areas

BCA Table B1.2a 2019 Structure - Structural provisions - Determination
of individual actions - Importance levels of buildings and structures

BCA E1.8 2019 Services and equipment - Fire fighting equipment - Fire
control centres

BCA F5 2019 Health and amenity - Sound transmission and insulation

BCA Spec F5.2 2019 Health and amenity - Sound insulation for building
elements

BCA G5.2 2019 Ancillary provisions - Construction in bushfire prone
areas - Protection

BCA JV4 2019 Energy efficiency - Air-conditioning and ventilation
systems - Building envelope sealing

GBCA 2022 Specifying for Green Star Buildings using NATSPEC

Green Star 2021 Green Star Buildings

Green Star Design 2019 Design & As Built v1.3

NATSPEC DES 009 2011 Limit state design

NATSPEC DES 010 2021 Atmospheric corrosivity categories for ferrous
products

NATSPEC DES 018 2019 Bushfire protection

NATSPEC DES 019 2021 Pipe support spacing

NATSPEC DES 030 2014 Seismic design actions on non-structural components

NATSPEC DES 045 2021 Corrosion protection of building services

NATSPEC GEN 004 2015 Shop drawings and samples

NATSPEC GEN 006 2015 Product specifying and substitution

NATSPEC GEN 008 2008 Branded vs generic worksections

NATSPEC GEN 009 2019 Hold points and witness points

NATSPEC GEN 011 2019 Specifying NCC requirements

NATSPEC GEN 014 2018 Submissions and testing

NATSPEC GEN 016 2018 Preliminaries and contract schedules

NATSPEC GEN 020 2018 Building commissioning

NATSPEC GEN 021 2017 Scope of works clauses

NATSPEC GEN 024 2021 Using NATSPEC selections schedules

NATSPEC PRO 003 2015 Warranties for steel protective coatings

NATSPEC TR 01 2021 Specifying ESD

NATSPEC TR 03 2018 Specifying design and construct for mechanical
services

NATSPEC TR 07 2021 Access for maintenance

NCC 2019 National Construction Code

NOHSC 1016 2005 National Standard for Construction Work

Qld Gov Act 2002 Professional Engineers Act 2002

SA Gov G172 2018 Seismic restraint of engineering services

Safe Work Australia 2020 Guide to handling refractory ceramic fibres
